Right. Who's our first submission?
I am.
In person. It needs to be in person.
Yes. We have
Te Mana o te Data Māori Data Trust.
Not here. Okay.
Let's go to the Zoom. Do we know if the
Zoom's ready?
Yeah.
Are they online?
Yes.
So I'll just...
And no special start.
We'll leave now, they might come back.
Good morning.
Kia ora.
Morena. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you for being available a little bit early.
But looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
So we've got 10 minutes, as I say. So please leave some time for some questions
if you can. Thank you.
Thank you. Sorry, we just got the thing that our internet connection is unstable,
so let us know. Classic.
Oh, right. Okay.
Classic for a select committee, so yeah.
Thank you. We'll take it away.
Te Mana Roranga, the Māori Data Sovereignty Network, brings together more than
800 Māori researchers, practitioners, and entrepreneurs who are passionate about
data and Māori rights. As a group focused predominantly on advocacy,
Te Mana Roranga is different to Te Kāhui Roranga Charitable Trust,
who are party to the Mana Oraite Agreement.
However, we support the submission on this bill made by the Data Iwi
Leaders Group. Te Mana Roranga also engages with the Global
Indigenous Data Alliance, supporting the realization of global indigenous
data rights through the care principles and supporting UNDRIP and
other international and national treaties and conventions.
Today, representing Te Mana Roranga are three members of Te Whakapū, the
steering group. Dr Lara Greaves, an associate professor in politics at
Victoria University of Wellington with expertise in Māori politics, survey
development, quantitative methods in Māori and LGBTQ+
demography. Dr Logan Hamley, a senior researcher at Whakawai Research
Services, a Ngāti Hauāz lead research center.
And Larissa Renfrew, a PhD student at the University of Auckland who has conducted
research related to Māori data sovereignty and ethics, Māori identity, youth
wellbeing, and demography.
Collectively, our group has also used the RDI in research, and also been
consulted by Stats NZ about the approach to
LGBTQ+ topics in the census.
TMR's position on this bill is shaped by our understanding of Māori data as
both a strategic asset and a living taonga to Māori.
This includes both data produced by the census or the new proposed
approach. Our position is also formed by the principles of Māori data
sovereignty as foundational to Te Mana Roranga's advocacy work.
Te Mana Roranga welcomes the opportunity to submit on this bill, and we want to
begin by acknowledging that there are genuine positives in the proposed model.
More frequent data releases will be valuable.
The flexibility to tailor surveys for different subpopulations is
promising, and we commend the focus on meeting the needs of communities, including
Iwi Māori. But we have serious concerns, and we believe this
legislation is premature. The move to administrative census
removes the enumerated census before we know the replacement works.
Experts across the board have raised grave concerns about data quality, and
Statistics New Zealand's own independent review has indicated that high-quality
statistics from administrative data will not be achievable by
2028.
For Māori, the stakes are particularly high.
Administrative data is deficit-framed.
It is collected at the most vulnerable moments in people's lives and does not tell
the full story of our communities.
Critical variables like Māori descent, Iwi affiliation, and te reo
Māori fluency have no clear plan still.
And Māori descent is not just a data question.
It underpins our electoral system and our constitutional arrangements.
There is also a deeper issue of data sovereignty and consent.
This bill expands and links administrative data without free,
prior, and informed consent, and without adequate Māori governance, and
without upholding the Mana Oraite Agreement.
Aotearoa has the opportunity to build a world-leading trustworthy data system,
and this bill, as it stands, moves us in the wrong direction.
Yeah. And as for our recommendations, we kind of considered, okay, so
there's been this process, it's been quite a long consultation process, a
methodological process within Stats NZ, and we can definitely
see some flaws in that process and really want to know what
is the best model going forward. How can we make this work considering costs,
considering the various issues we've discussed today, and that various other
speakers will discuss today? We think that an independent review of the
methods, of the governance, of the decisions made so far is
really our recommendation, and making sure that there are-...
reviewers with expertise in Māori data sovereignty, Māori data
governance. We see a real missed opportunity here to create
our own model, our own data ecosystem.
Not just copying a Nordic model, but making something unique
to Aotearoa, New Zealand that brings in Te Kahui
Turoa's Māori data governance model, which has some great features for
everyone, but would also uphold Tititi and do great
in terms of building a trustworthy data system, a robust data system, and
one that just works better for everyone and ultimately saves a lot of
money. We think it's great that the bill moves towards greater
engagement than just every five years with Māori, but the way that
administrative data works is that decisions are made within agencies
and made within Stats NZ that need greater review and
greater engagement with Māori. Because we know for population,
someone will make a decision that just seems like a little technical tweak
here and there, but it can have a lot of effect on someone's day-to-day
life or how they interact with the state and the system.
So ultimately, we really think that this is a missed opportunity to
create a great data system that governs
our data as New Zealanders and as Māori, as
taonga, upholds Māori data sovereignty, governs data as
taonga, but also as a national strategic asset.
So ultimately, we side with a lot of the experts that are saying there are great
methodological issues, but also point to the suite of governance
issues as well with this move away from the enumerated
census. Kia ora. Thank you for listening.
Good. Thank you very much. Now, I've got a couple of questions, or three actually.
Camilla Belich first.
Kia ora. Thank you very much for your
oral submission and your written submission.
I note the strong points you've made around Māori data sovereignty,
Tititi, and also recommend an independent review.
But I just wanted to ask in terms of if this bill was
to go ahead as it's currently outlined, acknowledging those
strong points of your submission, what, if any, issues do you see
around the actual administrative data and how that would
look in terms of its falseness? Do you have any concerns
around
that type of result that might come out of the use of
administrative data?
Absolutely. I think it was really well laid out
by the independent review that was done by Stats NZ
that indicated that we just won't have that
high-quality administrative data by 2028.
So if this does roll out, there are going to be major gaps, and those gaps are
going to cause a lot of harm for Māori.
Mm. And Māori descent.
Yeah.
That's something that our electoral system is based on, is it's one of the lowest
quality indicator with the lowest rate of coverage.
Mm-hmm.
And for us as analysts, as scientists, the first thing you do with a new
method is you make sure it is super robust, and there's always going to be
naysayers, but you want it to be pretty good that there's-
Mm
... critiques around the edges, but people think it's robust before you bring
something else in. And for Māori descent in particular, that's not the
case.
Mm.
All right. I've got a question from Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Mine's kind of a supplementary, I think, to Camilla's, because I was looking at
paragraph 36 of your submission, where you talk about some of you
have obviously used the IDI, and you were disappointed with the quality
and breadth of the data. You got a couple of examples of what you'd mean by
that?
So basically, when you go to the IDI, you think, okay, you're going to have
millions and millions of cases of potential--
Normally I do surveys, so it's like, wow, N equals four million. Excellent.
The problem you then have is that these data were collected
when people are, say, getting arrested, or they're
collected when someone's in hospital.
So there's all sorts of very strange kind of patterns in the data.
Mm-hmm.
Like missing data where you wouldn't expect it, places where people's
ethnicity changes-
Mm
... just over data sets at any given snapshot in time.
So there's a lot of issues. And I would say at the moment,
my bedtime reading is Walgreen and Walgreen, "Register-Based Statistics", and I
would recommend it to the select committee.
It's an excellent book that Stats NZ have said they based this approach
on. The Nordic model, they patched all of that and made sure
that there weren't issues across data sets before they implemented
an administrative census. So that's what you would say is that you need to make
sure that you don't have these gaps or this weird
inconsistency in the data, and that you have a very clear, transparent, robust
approach to where there are inconsistencies, especially for things like the Māori
Descent Indicator.
Mm. Thanks.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your submission.
It's been very helpful and very-
Thank you
... comprehensive, your submission. So thank you for this morning.
Right.
Thanks, everyone.
Now, we're going into the next one, Community Housing
Aotearoa.
Are they available?
They're online, Chair.
Okay.
Good morning.
Nice to see you. Are you on your own this morning?
I believe Paul will be joining me, but I-
Okay
... will go ahead and kick off. Morena, ko toko. Chris Gladdell, toko inuma.
I'm the Deputy CE with Community Housing Aotearoa, and thank you for the
opportunity to address you this morning.
Won't speak to the points in our submission.
We share concerns about the changes that are taking place,
and specifically, I'd like to give a couple of examples from current work that we
have underway.
Our
work relies on accurate data to understand what's going on with
households and housing in Aotearoa, New Zealand, and currently doing a
bit of work for a community trust in the South Island.
And the ability to look at, say, rental housing stress, changes in
rates of home ownership, of overcrowding,
rely on data out of the census currently.
And with the change in approach, what we understand from engagement with
Stats New Zealand is that for communities under 5,000 in
population,
they're just going to become invisibleYou really
won't be able to get down into the details like we currently are in
being able to separate households into income bands, into
renters and homeowners, and then understanding
their levels of housing stress and other outcomes.
And we find it somewhat interesting at the time that we're
moving toward and progressing with the social investment approach that we
support, and relying on the IDI to be able to understand
outcomes from interventions. And with these
changes, we have serious concerns about the ability to understand,
especially in smaller communities, and as was noted by the prior
respondents, say, by ethnicity,
and with different Iwi affiliation.
And so we think that really putting in
place
the fundamentals of the administrative data approach needs to be done before
we move away from the enumerated census
because of that inability to really look down into communities,
say, like districts in Waimate or McKenzie that have
a few thousand households there.
Now,
going forward, we've made a number of recommendations on how we think we can
mitigate some of the worst impacts, but we really see the
opportunity to do a pause and to put in
place the safeguards that are needed to ensure that we have the ability to have
accurate data on which to make informed decisions,
which we believe will be lost.
I'm currently also participating on a Stats NZ user
group around the housing domains in trying to understand how we
can identify different data sets to replace what's going
to be lost. And some things are fairly fundamental.
And in that work, we know that, say, renters
about
reliance on the MB
bond data
is only providing about 85% coverage.
So we're losing 15% of renters, which we know is a growing
portion of all households.
We also know that there are problems in matching
LINZ title data
to addresses within Stats NZ, which is important to understand coverage
of, say, ownership of trusts and owner occupation.
And so there are some known
deficiencies in the proposed approach that's going to fundamentally
change the ability to have good data for housing.
I think we all recognize the fundamental importance of a home
and how important it is to have a stable place to raise a
family, to grow connections with community.
And we would urge the committee to look at the timing of these
changes and what needs to be put into place to
ensure that we can continue to have robust data on which to make
informed decisions that
are also fundamental to the resource management reforms and
projections that are going to be required to plan for growth over 30
years. And if we don't have a good understanding of the
demographic
and
other changes within our population in areas, how can we adequately plan for
that future growth and ensure that we're able to deliver
outcomes that are better than what we're getting today.
So with that, I'll hand it across to Paul, who's joined us.
Morning, Paul.
My apologies for lateness. Andrew, you must be running ahead of schedule.
We are.
Excellent. Well, thank you for the time you've given to us.
I'm going to speak more to the logic of this
proposed change and suggest
whether it's in a wellbeing context or in a social investment context.
I'm going to suggest the cost of not doing the census is a
quantum far greater than the cost of doing it.
And I'm questioning the logic for this change.
Because in a world, let's call it a social investment world, which
is where we are politically at this point in time,
the costs of not identifying groups and
cohorts, as Chris has just spoken to, who are our most
vulnerable,
the risk is that we don't identify and intervene
upstream in terms of the causes of those issues.
So let's talk briefly about homelessness, which is one example that's in the public
discourse at present.
It is far more expensive to treat people in an emergency
department or to have them in a prison than it is
to address the upstream root causes
to address that. And everyone we've spoken to
including one of the most eminent statisticians in the world,
Liam Cook, who was our chief statistician and was also the chief statistician in
the UK for a number of years,
has told us the dangers of not doing a census and the
risks of not identifying those people inside
households, because this is the one opportunity we have as a nation
to look inside a household in disaggregated
forms into gender, into ethnicity, into age.
And we have, as you know, a huge wave of older adults coming through to
low fixed income retirement with no assets and no provisions
for their adequate housing. And so I'm suggesting to
you that the logic of getting rid of the
census is fundamentally flawed, even if you're just looking at it through a
financial lens.
And people internationally who have suggested this in other
jurisdictions have lost their jobs over this.
So it's something we're taking very seriously.
And so I'd ask you to consider that in your deliberations.
And alsoNot to
put too fine a point on it, but making homelessness illegal
and then not counting them
as homeless people does not fix the problem.
So where's the logic for this change?
All right. Hey, thank you for those comments.
Can I ask you, you've made some helpful recommendations towards the end of
your submission,
one of them which is increasing the sample size from
50,000 to 100,000, which our professor talked about
last week.
My
understanding of the approach is obviously sample size is pretty important.
You've said populations under 5,000 basically get missed out.
By increasing it to 100,000 and then your
second limb was about better community work in terms of
identifying those sort of very specific communities that should
be
subject to some form of census. How far does that go towards
addressing the problem?
It improves the data quality faster.
So I mentioned in my opening remarks that it was until
2032 that we anticipated being able to get down to communities of about
5,000 in population. And so by doubling it would bring
that forward and give you greater insights
faster.
Right. Okay.
Yeah.
Carry on.
So it still doesn't replace fundamentally.
Yeah.
You'll still have gaps,
but it does improve. If this is the approach that's chosen
to go, it will help to mitigate the worst of it and bring
data forward more timely.
And I'm not trying to be contentious, but just you talked about
homelessness.
Even in the census, we all realize that a census, even now, the last
census had quite a significant
element that wasn't counted, couldn't be counted, and homelessness is
notoriously difficult. So
even if you
carry the existing census, wouldn't we still be having trouble
trying to get a better understanding of homelessness, to
use your example?
Definitely.
I think significant improvements have been made in
process there internationally. So snowballing is a
well-known and accepted methodology for that in terms of getting
out.
What we know is that homeless communities all over New
Zealand, even in small town and large centers, have a
community amongst themselves. And so with some diligent work
using that technique, it can be a very effective method because they know
how to find each other, to put it bluntly.
And I think even in communities below the 5,000 threshold, and
it's worth mentioning, for example, the housing crisis that we have right
now on the Chatham Islands and also in the Rakiura, Stewart Island.
Sure, it's a population of 450 people, but we have every summer
an older adult housing crisis there which would be completely
blind to if we were using government-sourced data because no
one from Stewart Island who's a lifelong Islander is going to get on a
boat, go to Invercargill to an MSD office to
ask to go on a list for a house which does not
exist in their community. So we're really worried about the rural
damage that could be done by removing the census.
Okay. Hey, thank you for your time. Very good submissions, actually.
We've got good submissions on this bill, but yours is a very good one.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Right now we're going to our next submitter, hopefully
Dr. Katie Bates.
Bruce, sorry, Dr. Katie Bruce or Patrick Gemmell.
Are you-
Patrick's on the phone.
Patrick.
Are they there on the screen?
Here we are. Patrick or Katie, are you
available?
Good morning, Patrick. How are you going? And Katie, Dr. Katie Boxall, I think.
Thank you. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Just please leave a little bit of time for questions. Floor is yours.
Will do. Kia ora tatou. Hui e. We are the
national peak body connecting Tangata Whenua and
community in the voluntary sector.
Hui e supports the modernized census if it means more equitable,
more frequent, and more community-centered data.
Tangata Whenua and community and the voluntary sector contribute
immeasurably to the wellbeing of Aotearoa.
So the census must be designed, in our view, to see us.
We welcome your questions, and we urge the committee to strengthen the bill so
the census becomes more equitable, more community-centered, and not
less.
Administrative data first risks deepening inequity.
Our data mapping. Existing data, government data already
is, in our view, piecemeal, small scale, and disjointed, particularly
across Statistics New Zealand, the Ministry of Social Development,
Oranga Tamariki, Department of Internal Affairs, and the Ministry of Business
Innovation and Employment.
Admin data reflects
who government already counts in our view.
Marginalized groups,
voluntary networks, informal groups, rural organizations are
least likely to
appear reliably.
Annual outputs must include community indicators.
Annual publication from 2030 is welcome, but without explicit
provision, will default to populations and, in our view,
housing only.
This must embed an annual framework, voluntary rates, community
participation, and social cohesion.And please do
not leave this to discretion. Katie?
Oh, kia ora, Patrick. Tēnā koutou.
It's a real pleasure to talk to you about this really important
issue today. We have been trying as a peak body
across the sector to understand the
data that's happening across 27,000 charities,
over 100,000 community organizations,
and we have real concerns that if we are not able to do this
with what's currently available, then what is now on
offer in this bill will just make that
harder. Because essentially, decision-makers inside of the sector,
but also decision-makers in government, cannot make good funding decisions,
cannot make good policy decisions unless you have
the right evidence. And of course, counting just what you already know
inside of government just doesn't give you that broader picture.
The sector essentially is largely invisible in the way that we present
budget, and in the way that current administrative data
is collected. And I can give you a tiny example of having done a
review into policing, communities and policing
outside of this mahi, that police don't collect
data on disabled people that they interact with.
And so of course, there's just a complete void and a complete vacuum
of information there, even though we know that that overlap is really significant.
Now, the Nonprofit Institution Satellite Account
is one of those examples of something that gave us such great
in-depth information, and we're reliant on that
now from 2018. So pre-COVID times, we're needing to make
decisions about our sector, about its resilience, about its
future from something that is so outdated.
And so what we think is that
we need to essentially,
given our sector is under acute pressure,
really concentrate this modernization on the
indicators that are going to
make the most difference and be
useful for decision making.
One of those things, for example, is that Māori data
sovereignty must be a design principle.
It's not a group to consult with outside, but it's
actually needing to be designed in right from the
beginning about what data is being collected, how it's being
collected, how it's being shared, and then how it informs
decision making all the way through, and this bill in its current form
treats Māori data interests as a consultation item and not foundational
design principle, and the bill should require co-design with Māori.
And we recommend reinstating Te Kupenga which gave such a
holistic and real insight into community-level data.
So we hope that you can see the value outside of government
decision making, and of course to inform decision making of
community
indicators and
community regular and robust
data to inform our sector and to inform government making
decisions. Kia ora. Welcome any questions.
Okay, thank you. I've got Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thanks. And just Katie, to pick up one of your points, can you explain what
the Nonprofit Institution Satellite Accounts were,
how they operated and what kind of data that gave you access to?
And were they part of the census?
Because--
Yeah.
So run by Statistics New Zealand, and I think probably one of
your next submitters, Len Cook, will be able to give you a really more in-depth
answer than I can. But what they essentially gave us
is
they give a definition of the sector.
They look at all the different components.
So, all the different sub-sectors, the size and
scale and economic
contribution of those different parts of our sector.
So you look at social services, housing,
child and youth services, all of those different parts, and the environment,
arts, culture, heritage. And what they do
is ask those organizations critical questions
about
the conditions for the sector,
and that is the only real in-depth information
that we have.
And was that part of the main five-year census, or was
that a separate piece of work, Katie?
So my understanding is that it's a separate piece of work that is done
by Statistics New Zealand.
Okay. Now I've got Camilla Village.
Kia ora, thank you for your submission.
And thanks for highlighting the Te Kupenga and the
Nonprofit Satellite report as well.
In terms of your submission, some of the other submitters
to this bill have said that they're kind of opposed to the change from a move
to administrative data, but your submission seems to be saying, let's
increase the amount of administrative data or increase the number of data
sets that we have, and make sure of course that they have
data sovereignty and good principles in them.
Is that a correct reading of your submission, that you're not opposed to the
change to administrative data, but you just want the
data sets that are relied on to be
increased and improved?
Not quite. So we are not opposed to the modernization of
the census and the way in which we've got administrative
data and we've got the census, so let's look at them together and
really understand what are the limitations of administrative data, and if
we rely on that alone, we're missing out hugely,
as you heard from the last submission, and those gaps, particularly those
marginalized communities.But we do have that
administrative data, so let's use it.
Let's not pretend we don't have it, but we need to make sure it's all linked up
as part of a bigger understanding
across the sector.
But the census just gives us so much more than they ever can.
Okay. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning.
Very enlightening for that.
And great, hope you have a good morning.
Right now, we've got Mr. Peter Crampton
by Zoom as well, haven't we?
Yes.
It's Helen on-
Helen?
Oh, that's in a different sheet. Okay.
She's appearing-
Helen on behalf of Peter Crampton.
Right.
Oh, yeah. Here, I better use this sheet then. Right.
Helen, are you with us?
Yes, I hope you can hear me. I'm trying to make you see me.
The-
We can't see you, but we can hear you. That's the main thing.
Okay. Apologies on not being able to be seen. My video is not turning on.
No, that's all right. That's all right, Helen.
Okay. So I'm Dr. Helen Figgers in place of Professor Peter
Crampton, and presenting on behalf of the team that has created the New Zealand
Deprivation Index for every census from nineteen ninety-one to twenty
twenty-three. We used data from the full enumeration census
of population and dwellings to quantify the relative socioeconomic
deprivation of small areas, generally only one to two hundred people,
often SA1s, across New Zealand. NZDep
was initially created to help with resource allocation in the health sector, but
has also found a wide range of use in other sectors, like ECA and
community law centers.
NZDep is useful precisely because it has an intensely place-based
measure that identifies where people, family, and households experience
relative socioeconomic deprivation.
The full enumeration census of population and dwellings has also been
intensely place-based, tying the characteristics of dwellings,
households, and people to the areas in which they live.
There are two main replacements to
the
full enumeration census, the Census Attribute Survey and the Admin
Population Census. So firstly, the proposed Census Attribute
Survey is place-based, but it won't count everyone, and it will
average
results over much larger areas than NZDep uses.
Only those with five thousand people or more.
This means no information available at the SA1 level and no
information available for almost all SA2s, and only for
about half of SA3s.
So it's not going to be useful for the creation of future NZDeps.
Pockets of socioeconomic deprivation, sometimes only one or two blocks
long, can exist inside well-off areas like Karori, and
similarly, well-off pockets can exist inside poorer locations.
And capturing this small area diversity is one of the really
important uses of NZDep.
The other thing, the Administrative Population Census.
This will aim to capture everyone, but admin data is collected at
the person level and is not intrinsically place-based.
Connections to place have to be worked out, and as recently as March this
year, Stats New Zealand reported an address consistency
of only eighty-seven percent. Similarly, although Stats New
Zealand is investigating how to calculate families and households from
person data, it cannot yet adequately do so.
Also in March, it reported a calculated household consistency
of only sixty-eight percent.
Families and households are vital subgroups of society, and people's
experience in them is part of their socioeconomic experience.
And so they're important in an NZDep.
There are also quality issues with admin data.
The information will only be as timely as the person's last interaction with
government services. This means for some people, it's going to be wildly out of
date or nonexistent, and for others, extremely current.
Whether or not it's out of date could also be socioeconomically patterned,
and the accuracy of data will be affected by people's willingness to
share information with the different services and the computer systems and
programming within which it's stored.
Overall, of the nine variables we used to calculate NZDep
twenty twenty-three, only three were at the person level and
are already confirmed to be available in some way inside the
Administrative Population Census.
The other
six at the family, household, and dwelling levels may or
may not become available. Some probably will, others almost
certainly won't. We currently don't know.
And we don't know how good the quality and coverage of any variables that do
become available will be.
So these issues will negatively affect the production of any future
NZDep-like index.
So we do not believe that any changes should be made to the full
enumeration census until it can be confirmed that the
replacement data is of adequate quality, coverage, and
granularity. And for these reasons, we oppose this bill.
If the bill is passed, then we urge the committee to ensure adequate funding for
Stats New Zealand and all the other government agencies who will need to be
contributing admin data for the formidable data task
ahead to ensure that data of adequate quality is available.
And we also recommend that in the very early twenty-thirties, there's a
review to implement it to investigate whether or not the data is
actually suitable for New Zealand's data needs, and if
not, a plan to revert to a full enumeration census.
Thank you. Any questions?
Yes, HelenJust first of all,
in terms for the confidence level, even with the last census,
as you
well know, the responses from individual households
is a decreasing number. I forget exactly what it was in the
last census. But to try and get back up to the confidence
level, the Stats New Zealand obviously had to rely on a lot of admin
data anyway. My question to you, I think you used the figure 87%,
but
question to you, is the increasing proportion of people who are
not willing to respond to a census, are they often the people that
are the most vulnerable, or is that an unfair
characterization of the type of people
who are not responding to a current census form?
Do you have a view on that?
Look, I do not know for certain. I would certainly suspect
along with you that it's the most vulnerable people who are those
who possibly interact least with the census.
But the address consistency of 87%, that was
you use it comparing the admin piece, APC, with
the
census data that existed, which had a bit of imputation going on to
begin with. So that is probably, if anything, an overestimate
of how good the address information is.
Okay. So in your submission,
at bottom of page two, you talk about people with no
access to internet at home and you say under the
new approach using admin data, no and will
never be able to get that information.
Whereas at the moment with the census, even with a
relatively low or decreasing number of households responding to
censuses.
Why do you say that that is no and probably never?
Because presumably what Stats New Zealand will do, they
will go to all the internet providers in the country who will know every household
in the country and know what the proportion wouldn't be connected.
So
that would be an obvious
approach for Stats New Zealand to adopt.
But you just plainly say that that would never be available.
I'm just asking why did you come to that view?
Well, we say probably never, not certainly never.
And we come to that view because it is not government
data. And,
for instance, Stats New Zealand's had some information available on
connection to the electricity network for some time, but it is not available
in the IDI, and it has not been a priority.
We don't know the
future, but certainly it's unlikely
to be available before there's adequate family or
household data. It-
Okay. Well, that's certainly a question we'll direct to Stats New Zealand.
So thank you for that view on that. That's
helpful. Okay. Thank you, Helen. That's been
very helpful and
particularly in
presenting that and on behalf of Peter Crampton as well, Professor Crampton
as well. So thank you both for your contributions, been very good.
Thank you.
Right. Now I'm going to ask Mr. Cook to come to the front.
We're obviously looking
forward to your submission, Mr. Cook,
given your background.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hopefully not only because of its length.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to talk.
Can I say it's my experience as government statistician in the United Kingdom and
New Zealand and extensive exchanges over the
years with European, Pacific, and Commonwealth statisticians
that have led me to offer you the advice that you need to initiate an
independent review. Is this change that simple
and even necessary? Officials say that it doesn't change the legal framework
governing how we collect the census.
In fact, by making the administrative data first regime
mandatory for future population statistics, you are placing
constraints and limits on the statistical properties of our statistics
by you're actually setting in stone a path
that's with untried and flexible methodology.
By deliberately removing much needed flexibility, this bill is
a methodological handcuff on the independence of the statistician because
you're telling them what they can't do.
And I think are MPs really equipped to decide what and
where statistical methods are best used for understanding New Zealand's
populations?
I think that you're misreading what you're saying in the bill.
Can I also make the point that few of the administrative records that
must be used can possibly conform to the international
statistical standards that are embedded in survey designs and official
statistics. This non-conformance will undermine the quality of many
international comparisons and make a break with many past statistics
on ethnicity, occupation, family, for example.
The bill will force change in statistical frames and Ms.
Vickers has really explained that really well.
Can I make a point that
for which has spent two hundred billion on infrastructure, placing it,
huge issues of emergency management, housing and places.
It's got huge issues of environmental control.
We need to know more about place rather than give away what we have by
shifting to a person frame from a household frame.
Normally, in most countries, administrative data is
recognized as taking up a growing share of the information that IT enable
assist to integrate with official statistics.
Other countries, every other country in our model is exploiting
this expanding integration capability
by actually using the infrastructure of households that it
has by developing geospatial frames.
I would argue land information in New Zealand and the government statistician are
five to ten years behind the eight-ball.
Getting seduced by the IDI they have lost the plot and
we're basically at risk of abandoning the critical elements of our statistical
infrastructure.No other country is adopting this New Zealand
model. In the UK,
I know a lot about that, they explicitly rejected such an unorthodox model last
year, even after first investigating it since 1987.
These ideas are not modern in London.
These bills have been justified by recent
reviews of the census. I would argue, and it's very clear, the last two
censuses were complete blunders.
They do not represent how we have run censuses in the past
or how other countries run them. The review of 2018 census, for
example, pointed out that the department wrongly relied on out-of-date address
lists.
People were never even counted. I must remind you that a census is a census
of population and dwellings. The first job of a government statistician is
to find every place, every dwelling where people are,
exist, and then you inquire of them.
That was not done in 2018 or
2023. It was even compounded by the
then Minister of Statistics, David Clark, and his cabinet agreeing to
only get 90% of the population in the census.
Absolutely bizarre move. The '23 census
repeated that abysmal result only, as the external review pointed out,
the address lists were even worse.
The fact it cost twice as much as any census we've had
before has not been investigated.
The finance ministers I worked for, Richardson, Birch, and Gordon
Brown, would have had my guts strewn around the bloody place.
This has not been investigated. I don't know where our finance ministers
are. The findings of Michael Heron
QC on the Manuraea errors highlighted
incredibly poor monitoring and substandard quality
management on the 2023 census. I believe you are
wrong, Mr. Chairman, in asserting that the 2018 census
or '23 censuses are benchmarks of performance that we should
use to justify any change. They're out of line with international experience.
Our Aussie mates continue to do better.
A couple of other final comments. There was a review in
2024 of what was statistics used
for. This report totally ignores, if you do a little
search of keywords, doesn't use the word infrastructure except statistical.
Deprivation is mentioned once, fiscal isn't, yet we've got a
30% reduction in our fiscal position in the next 20 years.
Surely the rethinking of the welfare state ought to be part of the planning of our
census. Emergency isn't there, so emergency management stats don't
know, and despite the existence of Simon Upton, climate is
mentioned once. Can I say also, do you know the Electoral Commission
has not obtained any independent statistical advice of
the changes to these metrics that are now in the Electoral
Amendment Bill?
Pretty unwise, I'd say. In my written submission, I've listed eight
critical actions that would enable a trustworthy census of
population and dwellings to take place
in 2028 within the law as it is now. Can I just conclude
by saying, to me, this is the most significant change to New
Zealand's official statistics in the last 50 years, and I've been around that
long. Parliament is being asked to urgently endorse major Electoral
Act changes, making it even more vital that members of Parliament seek
independent advice. Also, this bill gives excessive,
unfettered discretion to a government statistician on constitutional matters,
which may, of course, obscure things that do need transparency,
particularly given the untried nature of what we're now doing.
Right. Thank you. First question, Camilla Belich.
Thank you very much for your submission.
We've heard that the cost of a future census under the current
law would be prohibitive in terms of being able to continue that.
From what you've said today, it appears that you don't accept that
the cost that has been provided would necessarily
be in order for another census under this existing
law
to run. Is that correct?
Well, I would look at the cost of censuses in the past,
not just the last two. The last one is bizarre.
So would you really use that as a baseline without
properly understanding where the money went? We do not know where the money went.
I can't find out. The external review did not tell
us where the money went. It
didn't even tell us that it was twice as much per capita.
I had to do that calculation myself.
Yeah, that's interesting because obviously
the 2018 was 180 million, from memory, and
325 in 2023.
And
I'm keen to get your view on this, but my understanding was that
increasingly it's difficult to get people to respond to census
or censuses. That's the issue we've got, and New Zealand's not
uncommon. All jurisdictions, whether it's England, we've worked obviously
Canada, Australia, whatever. Everyone around the world is increasingly having
trouble when people front up to someone's house and ask for information, a lot
of them are now saying, "Take a
hike," or, "I'm not going to give my information to government."
So there is obviously the cost factor, and my
understanding that the estimate for the next census would have been much even
higher
because of that declining readiness for people to respond.
What was your experience in England?
Was that also happening there, or people were just saying to
the person who's turning up wanting to ask census
questions, they were just saying, "Take a hike"?
In 2001, we didn't have... Any problems we had
were of our own making.
But response rates there have declined, but not to the same extent.
The Australians are about 95%.
Yeah.
Can I say that there's a lot of knowledge we have through
epidemiological work of Ms. Vigors
and AI. We could actually anticipate in small
areas of New Zealand, knowing the past information we've got, what is the
likelihood that this particular patch will be more difficult than
others. You could have a comprehensive spectrum, and then you can target where your
resources are. The difficulty that you have if you don't
use that information, you're assuming for a start that everywhere will be roughly
the same, and therefore you don't deploy your resources.
This is what the Australians, for example, are doing, is using quite a lot of
thinking well in advance to delineate small
areas of Australia of where they think response
problems will be greater, and then they manage that.
We could use local government much more.
This last couple of census has completely ignored local government.
And what about in England? What were your response rates in England?
Sorry?
What were your response rates in England?
They were about 96, 95%. We had some areas
where we had a real problem, for example, young men-
Yeah
... were a problem. And in Britain also, we made the error in our
planning of not having a de facto census, like requiring
everyone to fill in a form and then extracting residents.
We allowed people to tell us whether they were a resident, so we
created some difficulties in that usual
census .
Did you have a different sort of legislative framework that put the onus on the
individual to respond, and if they didn't, there was some form of,
I don't want to use the word penalty, but some form of sanction if they didn't?
We didn't. But in the past,
we've normally ended up prosecuting about 500 or 600 people.
Right.
You could adopt a model that basically has a parking ticket type arrangement.
Where-
So in New Zealand, can we prosecute
people under that same framework?
Do we have a similar framework of what you had in England, for instance?
We've always prosecuted some
500-odd people in New Zealand.
In New Zealand?
Yes.
Oh, yeah.
And there's a measure of fairness, but they are often the people that have been
most obstructive.
But our response rate on the last census was way down, wasn't it?
It was, I think, in the 80s.
Yes, and I think that was an unforced error.
Right.
Got a question from Mr. O'Connor.
Yeah.
What do you think about some sort of hybrid model?
Obviously, we've got statistics now we didn't have in
your day, dare I say, Len.
And so we would be foolish to ignore that, the fact that there is, even if
it's just to
legitimize or to
the information that we're getting.
Could you see a good hybrid model there?
Look, I believe administrative data has a really critical role, but you need to
retain a household frame. And I think by giving it up,
what you're doing here, you are seriously constraining how a future government
statistician would think. We need
those records. There are some forms of information
that are really quite vital, but they're not only the administrative records the
state has, we also need a wealth of other information.
You imagine if we'd had school roll information every six months,
Len. The problem we've got is that population change
in small places now is much more dynamic than it has ever been.
But isn't that the argument for moving to an administrative model?
And again, I'm just asking this question, because the
disadvantage of a five-year census is it's immediately out of date.
Whereas a rolling
approach to it, and you use school rolls, we can get that
information from the Ministry of Education.
We can work out how many Maori are getting diabetes treatment from
Ministry of Health.
We can work out what the justice system's showing, all those sort of stuff.
We can use third parties to provide a lot of information
around household data, whether they have a mobile or not.
And that can be done in almost real time.
Why wouldn't you want to be moving to a model like that?
Or are you suggesting that you have to have a five-yearly model as
a sort of a standard sort of benchmark to check it occasionally?
Well, we have a five-yearly model, but we have annual population estimates.
And so we keep track of what's going on in the population in every place,
every year. That's been done since the 19th century.
But what I'm suggesting is that you're making two changes here.
One is proposing the greater use of administrative data, and that's happening
everywhere in the world. You're also proposing to change the fundamental
statistical frame of our population statistics to person
rather than household. And as was explained by Helen Vigors, that's a
massive shift. It's also making it very difficult to integrate
information that's also collected by households.
Our census frame gives us a great opportunity to survey, for
example, people who are disabled, people who wish to study.
We can target particular populations with a census
frame in a way that you can't with admin data.
Why can't you do a mini survey
just targeting disability? Because
if I want to
review this for people with disabilities, and I think the estimate is
250,000 by the time you take in mental as well as physical,
250,000 people in the country estimate,
out of a population of over five million, why would I
need a census every five years to get a view on them?
Why wouldn't I target the disability community in particular?
Or the-
But you don't have them every five years.
You only have it periodically when there's regarded as a need.
We haven't had a disability census.
Can I say, in '95, the disability community was
going to boycott the census because it was the only way of getting disability
information. We picked a Canadian model, had a disability question,
then ran a surveyBased on a sample of the people
that said they had a handicap and a smaller sample of those that
didn't. And that's how the census is actually a really rich part
of our statistical fabric, not just being a census, but being the
sort of frame for gathering all sorts of population information.
Todd Stevenson.
Thanks. And thanks for being here and your submission.
I just want to ask, you appear to be saying that there's a
kind of barrier. So let's just be clear, right, the census is actually individual
data being collected at a household level.
So in a sense, it's actually just aggregated to the household.
But are you saying that with the administrative data, there's some barrier to
aggregating to a household level?
Is that-
Yes
Okay. Can you just talk a little bit more through what the barriers, as you see
them, are?
Because people don't identify their family relationships in most administrative
data. Don't forget, we have no single administrative data
source that covers the whole population.
Yeah.
So if you want to cover the whole population, it's done with both a
hodgepodge in terms of the source, but also the period.
So the reference period, for example, if you, Mr.
Chairman, were to ask the stats office now for the information that's in the
IDI, not in the census, in the IDI, about you
in December last year, you will find some of it will go right
back to 5 or 10 years ago.
Right.
So it's that hodgepodge of a period that is the problem-
Right
... for analytical work with administrative data.
But
surely there is some technology solution where we could make sure every
household we... Well,
I see someone nodding, shaking at the back, but, we have rates information, for
example, to every address in New Zealand.
Some people will-- In some data sets, obviously, you'll identify that you live at
X address. So there must be some, even if it doesn't exist today, there must be
some ways around some of these issues.
Well, we won't have occupation information soon about the whole population
because the tax department no longer requires any of us
who have all, have able to simply get their tax return
determined mechanistically by the tax office.
So we're going to lose the one public
administration source of occupation data.
If you move to this model, we will not have occupation information at an
extraordinarily interesting time in the economic structure change in
New Zealand.
Okay.
So that's the sort of area-
Yeah. Okay
... government statisticians are at the bottom of the tree in determining
what administrative agencies. We fought for 40
years to get the Registrar General to add a simple question on a birth
record: "How many children have you had before this birth?" In the
end, we put it in the census because it was the only way we could find,
during a time of massive fertility decline, whether in fact people were
deferring births or whether they were not going to have them anymore.
So, there's a real tension in what you can get in admin
data. It's only what the departments themselves want-
Right
... and how they management is frankly not up to statistical
standards.
Okay.
Your second point,
on your last question.
You talked about,
and I think you're implying legislatively, that chief
statistician under this new piece of legislation,
no longer has to account at a household level.
Is that right? I'm trying to paraphrase what you said.
Are you saying that this legislation proposed bill
changes the prime intent of, or the
role of the chief statistician?
Yes, for future statisticians. You don't have to do it, actually.
To deliver the intent
of what you want to do, you do not have to have the bit at the front
that says, in future, the government statistician will be bound by the
administrative data first. I don't call it
census. Administrative data first model, future work.
You actually got a clause in there that I don't think you've either thought
about or you have understood the importance to a proper government
statistician of precisely the limits of independence.
So just to be clear, you're not suggesting that the chief
statistician or future chief statisticians have to
get information on households and people in particular to make up that household
data. What you're saying is the bill allows the
chief statistician to use other alternative means to get that data.
But you-
But you're also saying at the start, this will be the model you'll be forced to use
for the census.
Right. Okay.
And when you say that, you're actually binding a future government statistician,
and you're saying on one hand, they're independent on methods.
So you've got a bit of a contradiction.
Right. But it doesn't preclude them from doing surveys.
And surveys, well, no, that's not binding.
But you're limiting it because if they're only going to have a person frame-
Yeah
... to use from a census, then where do they get their household
frame from? Which is normally every five years because
the census of dwellings is the only time in
New Zealand we know where everyone actually lives in New Zealand.
There is no decent address list, don't go to the post office, that tells you where
everyone is in New Zealand. It's the five-yearly census of
dwellings.
Right. Hey now, Mr. Cook, we're way over time, but-
Oh, my apologies
... we are very keen to hear from you, so thank you for coming this morning.
Really appreciate your time.
Thank you very much for your forbearance of my-
No
... possibly,
can I just say the first
study of British administrative data was by a New Zealander, Dr.
Michael Cullen.
But it's called The Statistical Movement in Early Victorian Britain.
You're all right. Cool.
Thanks.
Yeah.
We're a bit behind.
Who have we got next?
Pakepake.
Okay, cool.
All right.
In person.
Is that you,
Morena?
How are you going?
Just, that was very compelling and, wow.
Thank you, Mr. Cook.Oh, give me a second.
I'm-
Of course
... feeling really intimidated now.
No, don't feel intimidated at all.
That was brilliant.
We're looking forward to hearing your submission.
Oh,
goodness.
Don't worry. You've intimidated us, too.
We're all worried.
Do you want some water?
He's that sort of intellectual character.
Do you want some water? Do you want some water?
Yes. Oh.
All right.
And that's why I came early because I wanted to hear the other
speakers and...
That's really helpful actually, I think, when people have heard previous speakers.
Yeah.
Thank you for doing it.
Wow.
I should've gone before
Mr.
Cook. Okay.
Tēnā koutou.
E te committee. Ko Hakiepa tōku ingoa.
Representing Te Wahine Ora o Hakiepa
Foundation.
I have previously engaged with the Justice Select Committee,
with the Maori Electoral...
Oh, wow. I'm really flustered now.
We remember. We remember you.
I'm really flustered. Yeah, population statistical formula last year in
August. And that was within my parliamentary
petition,
increase the number of Maori electorates.
So, I appreciate the opportunity to speak today, and
just a few months ago, I decided I think I'm ready to participate and
have a look at parliamentary bills.
So when I saw
this bill, I was quite chuffed, and I thought, "This is me,
and my area."
Part of my area.
So this bill, oh, God, focuses on improving how
census data is collected and produced.
That data directly underpins how
representation is calculated in New Zealand.
Wow.
So, I'm also new to using data, to be
quite honest. A bit of a late bloomer.
So
I from the other speakers
about the bigger picture.
Te Wahine Ora o Hakiepa Foundation supports the intent to improve
data collection,
including
the move toward more frequent population data,
and also
the shift of pushing back the next census to 2030.
It takes time to implement
new systems. And
hearing the other submissions,
and especially Mr. Cook,
is compelling.
But I still support
to go forward,
because there's a lot of knowledge coming through to help the Justice
Select Committee and the government to
create a more robust
system. Anyway.
However, improved data collection within a flawed
electoral statistical formula
model does not produce,
oh, s**t,
fairness.
It produces more precise inequity.
So,
I've
focused specifically on Part 2, Related Amendments to Other
Legislation, the amendments to the Local Electoral Act
2001, Clause 19 (4) ,
and I've just focused on the definition of the Maori
electoral population.
So,
Clause 19 does not come into force until the 1st of January
2030.
I just want to speak briefly. I'm not going to speak on
the whole
clause, but I have
separated into four
sections.
My first
recommendation,
which is 19 (4) , Section 5 (1) of
the Local Electoral Act. I'll just speak on that first part,
that prior to the government statistician deriving a Maori electoral
population figure under Section 35 (6) of the Electoral Act
1993, I propose that there is a dedicated
electoral population statistical formula bill
be introduced.
And at the moment, I'm finalizing a private bill
to help that along.
So, Clause 19,
Section 5 (1) under Clause 19 (4) ,
the wording demonstrates how the model continues to
reproduce the same structural issue of inequity
and under-representation of persons of Maori
descent. The wording in here
describes
the Maori ratio, although it does not mention the Maori
ratio. That's what it is describing.
So, I've specifically
put-I
do not support any of that section, and I've put my
recommendation. Again, I'm not going to go into all of
it.
God, this is terrible.
In
just--
oh, God, I'm losing it now.
That's all right. We've got your submission by the way.
Yeah, we've read it.
Yeah.
We've read it.
So,
I just want to close and finish on the last section of
that
number five,
where it
doesn't need to be there.
And what I
recommend that the Māori ratio,
the formula is R equals M divided by M plus G times
D, is abolished, as that is what underrepresents
the total Māori descent population in New Zealand.
So any figure produced using the current methodology,
regardless of improved data quality, will continue to risk
generating inequitable representation outcomes.
So
yeah. So the Māori ratio
is
yeah, under the
definition for the Māori electoral population.
I don't know why it was ever used.
And it's proven in the last two
years, the Electoral Commission
data, that the theory to use the Māori ratio
is highly inaccurate because it's an
assumption. It says proportional, but it's an assumption that the
behavior of unenrolled Māori in the
future
is the same as enrolled Māori on the Māori
roll and is the same
as enrolled Māori on the general roll.
So that assumption, that's what it is.
It's based on proportional, but it's assumption
that is highly inaccurate and
that's sort of where my mahi is focused and-
Okay
Thank you.
Yeah. Well, thank you. And you've submitted, and we've actually as a committee,
responded to you previously on your submission around this.
We wrote back to you quite comprehensively on that issue.
So we're looking forward to getting your member's bill.
You've mentioned it before, but thank you for your submission this morning
and
doing a good job.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to the Data Iwi Leaders
Group in Hamilton, I think.
Still on the line, isn't she?
Good morning, Morena.
Are you with us? Can you see them?
They're coming in.
Right. Good morning. How are you?
I'm fine, thank you, Andrew. <|diarize|>Ka nui te mihi ki a koe.
And thank you for the opportunity to present to the panel.
Look, I'm just going to give a hitchhiker's guide into who we are before
passing to Kiri Kofoed-McIntyre out of Rotorua to present
the key points on our submission. And again, thank you to you,
and the Justice Select Committee, for allowing us
this time. You will know that we are the Data Iwi
Leaders Group, which formulates part,
and represents statistical and digital
sort of considerations for the National Iwi Chairs Forum, who
represents more than 80 odd iwi right across the
country.
I'm
talking to you and to
Andrew. As the former Minister of Statistics, you're
acutely aware of some of the relationships here.
We stood up 10 years ago to address the
inadequacies, the fallibilities, and the inconsistencies
of the census data right from the
1990s. And we first established with
Minister James Shaw and Minister Peeni Henare, who were the
ministers in charge of statistics at that time.
Together, we formulated a working program to address
the inadequate Māori capture data
that was prevalent in the last few censuses.
Since that time, 10 years ago, we've worked with no less
than 14 ministers,
ministers and associate ministers for
statistics. We've worked with no less than four government
statisticians here as well. So
over that time we have created a comprehensive
relationship. You will know that in the last
census,
Te Kāhui Rārouma and the Data ILG worked very closely with
Stats New Zealand to stand up three pilot
programs for data capture for Māori as a
catalyst for other areas across the country.
We achieved a more than 90%
percentile
over those three areas
in the last census. And you'll be aware that last year,
Te Kāhui Rārouma and the Data ILG came out and
put out the Māori population data
in
concert with Stats New Zealand. And so the first
NGOOutput of data
was a huge step.
If we are to rely on
administrative data solely, we
think that that will be to the detriment of capture in
data statistics for Maori and for New Zealand.
I'm going to pause there,
Mr. Chair, and pass now to Kiri Kōwhai-McKay,
who is our expert and lead technician in this
space and one of the authors of the Maori Data
Governance Model to step through the key points of our
submission.
Kia ora, Rāhui. Ōtira, tena koutou.
Kia ora, e Te Mana.
I just want to reiterate Rāhui's thanks.
Thank you for allowing us to make this submission and for
joining today to provide an oral submission on the Data and
Statistics Amendment Bill. As Rāhui said, we're here
today on behalf of the Data Iwi Leaders under the mandate of the National
Iwi Chairs Forum, and we play a vital role in fostering Maori
data governance and the ethical use of data for the betterment of iwi,
of hapū, and whānau Māori. I'm going to take our submission
as read, but I would like to reiterate some of the key points for all of
you today, and then I will be available for some questions at the
end. Not as hard questions as what you threw at Len Cook, but we'll
try.
Our position on this bill is very clear.
We reject the bill in its entirety.
This includes the supplementary amendments required to the Electoral Amendment
Bill. Census data is a powerful tool for iwi Māori,
and it can help shape a prosperous future for our people.
What was once a weapon for subjugation and colonization of Māori
is now an instrument of visibility, advocacy, and
planning, and this bill puts this valuable tool at risk.
We think the bill is heading in the wrong direction.
But this select committee has an opportunity to steer a new course, one
that supports Māori to flourish and enables transparent Crown
decision-making and fair electoral representation,
and we have some solutions to help you achieve this.
But before we highlight the solutions, let's revisit some of the
key issues with the bill as it's drafted.
We feel the process has failed iwi Māori, and changes of this
magnitude require genuine shared decision-making,
and this has not happened here. This bill and the decision-making
process falls well short of the Crown's own Te Tiriti
obligations and of the Mana Ora I Te Relationship Agreement that we
have with Statistics New Zealand.
Iwi Māori are not advisors or priority communities.
We are your partners.
Today, I want to highlight three key problems with the admin-first approach.
Firstly,
critical variables will be lost. Iwi affiliation,
Māori descent, and te reo Māori will no longer be reliably
captured.
This is whakapapa data and a taonga under Te Tiriti, and
that requires care and protection.
At the most basic level, if you do not count people,
you do not see them.
If you do not see people, you cannot serve them.
Smaller population groups will be invisibilized, and our
people will suffer.
Secondly,
admin data is Crown-filtered and is not fit for purpose.
Admin data reflects interactions with government services,
often in deficit contexts, and in some cases,
collected without free, prior, and informed consent.
Many Māori are not even visible in government services data.
This means the data produced under this model will be incomplete
and unreliable, with far-reaching consequences for iwi
and the Crown.
Thirdly, quality will fall, and costs will likely rise.
The government claims that this change is more cost-effective than the full
enumeration approach, but this is not necessarily the
reality.
Poor data quality will cost our country far more than it
saves. Without good data, you cannot make effective
policy or investment decisions for Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Managing this transition well will require investment,
significant
investment, and that will still not solve the underlying issue.
This model is not fit for purpose. Investing to correct it,
especially in a way that reflects iwi Māori interests, will
require significant new spending.
As it stands, this change will materially harm Māori.
The consequences of moving forward with this bill will be
longstanding.
Our democratic rights are at risk.
Pushing the release to 2030 means the 2029 general
election electorate numbers will be based off outdated
data. This impacts the rights of Māori to
participate in the democratic process and the right to fair and
equitable Māori representation.
Inferior data quality also creates concerns around
electoral boundary accuracy,
fanning the flames of mistrust in democratic processes and decisions.
Our ability to monitor and plan is weakened.
Iwi Māori, we use census to monitor the Crown's own policies and impacts.
We use the census to monitor our own impacts.
It's a mechanism to keep the Crown and ourselves accountable and to
identify where we need to act to balance the waka.
Our right to self-determination is further diminished.
The admin-first data shifts the power to define iwi Māori
populations from iwi Māori, ourselves, to the
Crown.Moving from a predominantly
self-reported count of Iwi Māori to a collection of
data provided for other purposes, complemented by statistical
modeling, extinguishes our right to self-determine
our identity.
We will lose our right to be counted on our own terms.
But it's not too late to change things.
We're not just opposing the bill, we are providing solutions.
Our investment proposal to the previous Minister of Statistics
sets out three Iwi-led initiatives, building on the
initiatives that Rāhui
talked about with respect to the 2023 census.
So firstly, a Māori descent population file.
Secondly, an Iwi Māori survey program.
And lastly, a Māori descent census.
These will go some way towards mitigating the harm created by the proposed
changes in the census model.
But harm mitigation is not enough.
The committee can and must do more.
We ask the committee to recommend the bill does not proceed
until four conditions are met.
One, an independent review of the admin data first model's
fitness for purpose is conducted.
Secondly, Statistics New Zealand commits to transparently implementing
the Māori data governance model. Thirdly, adequate
long-term Crown funding is set aside for Iwi-designed data
solutions that meet our data needs.
And lastly, independent assurance is provided to
guarantee that Māori electoral rights will not be
harmed through any change in the census model.
Right.
Tēnā koutou.
Thank you very much. Now, we're a little bit over time.
And first of all, I just want to acknowledge what you do and the professionalism
you bring
on behalf of Māori in terms of data.
So I just want to say that publicly.
My question to you, and obviously you spoke to Honorable Shane Reti about
your investment proposals. What gives you
concern that...
And as you alluded to in your speech, during the last census, you
played a very important role in terms of getting better accuracy around
Māori data in certain areas, and without that,
the quality of the data would've been very poor.
What gives you concern that that similar approach
would not continue under admin data, so that we end
up getting very specific data around Iwi along the lines that
you talked about in your introduction?
So there are those three key variables that are of most concern to us.
And so if I focus in on just Iwi affiliation,
you will know, as the previous minister, we redesigned
that whole Iwi affiliation question in the 2023
census.
Yeah.
Particularly the online question, which completely
changed the quality of data that we received, particularly from the
2018 census. That question now
will not exist in any administrative collections.
But it would if you'd ended up doing more surveys,
specifically around Iwi, which is part of the approach
with the admin data, to be more tailored with certain
surveys. Or am I overstating that?
I think overstating that. So at the moment, the
Iwi affiliation, my understanding is the default will be the Ministry of
Education's Iwi affiliation data, where they only allow three
answers. The census allowed 16 answers to the Iwi affiliation
question. But the
question is not
designed similar to the census question that we
had. And so I guess that's why we're proposing the Iwi
Māori survey program in a wider
consideration of particular solutions.
But as it stands, there is not quality
administrative Iwi affiliation data that will help with the
gaps.
All right. Thank you.
Minister, if I could just add.
Those things out of the government departments are steered
towards an outcome in the education sector, in the health sector, in
the whatever sector. It doesn't lend itself to
questions and answers that lend itself to Māori population
data. And so that's where a huge amount of concern is for
us.
All right. Hey, thank you both for being with us this morning, and
very good to see you both again. But very helpful submission.
Right. Members, we're going to jump now to Retail New Zealand.
I think Carolyn Young is on the line. I saw her before.
Carolyn, are you there?
Is she still there?
I'll get her.
All right, cool.
Retail New Zealand.
Kia ora.
Good morning. Nice to see you both.
As you know, I'm Carolyn Young, and this is my colleague.
I'm Denise Garland. I'm the advocacy manager here at Retail NZ.
Of course.
Look, thank you very much for your time.
And I guess, really briefly, we know that you've read our submission.
Overall, we support the tenor of the bill, but there's
probably some specific things we just really wanted to pull out about.
And one is just the importance of making sure that the information
gathered is going to be accurate enough to depict
the changing demographics that we're likely to see across New Zealand
over the next 10, 20, 30 years, which is going to
change significantly. Retailers use data and
information to help them determine where a store should be
located, what demand is, whether their products are
best in that community or another community.
So, it's a really important aspect for
retail to be able to understand each individual community, and making
sure that the data is robust enough that it could give
us that granular information so that we can
continue to ensure that we can serve communities well across all of
our local spaces. So we think that that is really important.
We do think that a cadence of annual is a positive
move forward because-With the
anticipated changes in our demographics, it will be really
important for us as a country to really understand how
we need to move and what services are required in what
areas as those changes occur. So we think that that would be
a really useful space.
Yeah, I think that's mostly it. I just also think that one of
our recommendations is just ensuring that there is a
robustness or there is some consideration taken into how those
more difficult to reach populations are accounted for in the data
collection.
That obviously every level of data is really
important, and so some of those regions or
populations where they don't interact so much with official
sectors, there just needs to be a little bit more consideration as to how that
information is gathered about those populations as well.
And I
guess that touches really into those new migrants to New Zealand
whose English may not be their first language, they may not be familiar, and how do
we make sure that we capture those parts of our community so
that we can ensure that we can service the whole
of New Zealand as we're going to continue to change in the coming years.
Okay. Thank you very much. Members, you got questions?
Just one question.
Your last point, retailers require a complete picture
of local population. I presume we've heard the
difficulty and the lack of granular information with a
50,000 sample.
Mm.
When you say local,
can you give us sort of a view on to what extent
that you need that granularity just to try and from a retail
commercial perspective, what
would be important to you?
Yeah. So I think from a commercial perspective, if you're thinking
about
opening a supermarket or something, you'd want to know that in a suburb
or if you think of Auckland, you'd want to know what movement is happening
in each of those suburbs as it occurs.
If you're in a more provincial area, like I'll use Masterton because I grew up
there, you're probably wanting detail from that type of
community that demonstrates what's happening.
If I think about the Wairarapa, there's been significant
changes of how people live and where they're
located in the Wairarapa since I lived there.
And if you're only taking a snapshot of a few people across New Zealand,
you're not going to understand where that push-pull factor's going to
come in terms of demand and supply.
Okay. Hey, fantastic. Hey, lovely to see you both again.
Nice to see your
shirt, your, I don't know what you'd call it, but behind you.
It's a netball dress.
Yes.
All right. Hey, good to see you both.
Thank you.
Ka kite.
Bye.
Thank you. Now we're going to
Lisa Pisoni, I think is that right?
By Zoom.
Lisa, are you with us this morning?
Good.
Lisa, if you're there,
we're looking forward to hearing from you.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Tena koutou katoa. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Okay.
Ko Lisa Pisoni toku ingoa. I'm the founder and lead
architect of the Indigenous Data Authority.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear, and I am here to speak to the practical
implications of the proposed amendments to the Data and Statistics Census
Framework and the increased reliance on administrative
data.
I acknowledge that under the Data and Statistics Act 2022,
agencies are authorized to collect, share, and integrate data
for statistical purposes. I also acknowledge that
administrative data and data matching are established tools within the
government systems, including the electoral context under the Electoral
Act 1993. My submission is not that these
powers should not exist. My submission is that expanding reliance
on them in place of a comprehensive census introduces
material risks that are not currently mitigated.
The proposed direction shifts the system away from a
direct population-wide self-reported census towards a
model that relies on administrative data, data integration, and
statistical modeling. This is not a minor change.
It is a structural change to how population reality is
constructed. A full census provides a baseline that
is directly sourced from individuals, standardized across the
population, and independently verifiable.
Administrative data does not provide that.
It reflects who interacts with services,
what those services collect, and
how systems are designed. As a result, the
dataset begins to reflect the system and not the population.
Groups that engage less with services are recorded
inconsistently or are not fully captured by existing systems,
and they will be underrepresented. That's not a possibility.
That's an expected outcome.
Many administrative systems were never designed for statistical
completeness. They do not ask the same questions, use consistent
definitions, or capture information in a way that is
comparable across agencies. This leads to gaps,
inconsistent classification, and reliance on estimation.
When that data is aggregated and modeled, those limitations
compound. As reliance on modeling increases,
outputs may appear complete, but appearance is not the same as
accuracy.When data is incomplete at
source and used to generate inferred results, the final data set
is built on assumptions that are not always visible or
testable.
This creates a condition where decisions are made on data that cannot be
fully verified against reality. Alongside these risks, there
is a second issue. Data is collected under specific
conditions for a defined purpose, under a particular authority,
and within a specific context. Under the current and
proposed framework, data can be moved, combined, and reused
across systems. However, there is no consistent mechanism to
ensure that authority and context travel with that
data, and this simply means that systems are not required to
demonstrate that the use remains consistent with the original
purpose, and that authority remains valid, or that the
context has been preserved. Authority is
assumed rather than verified. In a system increasingly
reliant on integrated and modeled data, this creates a
material governance gap. Decisions are made using data where the
original purpose is unclear, the authority cannot be
demonstrated, and the context has been lost.
In any other regulatory environment, that would be considered a failure of
control. This matters because the point of risk is no longer
collection, it is use. If a system cannot demonstrate that
it has authority to use data in a given context at the point it
is being used, then the legitimacy of the decision cannot be
assured. The census also provides an independent point
of validation. It allows governments to check administrative
data, identify inconsistencies, and confirm whether outputs
align with the population.
If that function is reduced, there is no equivalent mechanism
to replace it. Without an independent benchmark, the system
becomes self-referential. These risks apply across the
population, but they are amplified for Māori.
The census is currently the only mechanism that allows Māori to
self-identify at scale and in a consistent way.
No administrative system replaces that function.
Administrative systems do not consistently capture
Māori identity, iwi or hapū affiliation.
And if reliance shifts to those systems, Māori are more
likely to be undercounted, misclassified, or simply
not captured at all. At that point, underrepresentation
becomes structural, and over time, this reduces visibility.
Reduced visibility has direct consequences like
funding, services, and policy decisions, because
that all follows data. If Māori are not fully
visible in that data, they are not fully reflected in those
decisions. And there is also a contextual risk.
Māori data is connected to identity, whakapapa, and
collective representation. When it is removed from its original
context and combined with other data sets and reused, its
meaning can change. Without mechanisms to carry forward
context and authority, outputs may appear valid but not
accurately reflect Māori reality.
The effects of this shift will accumulate over time.
Small inaccuracies will become embedded, gaps become
normalized, decisions become incomplete or decontextualized,
data begin to shape outcomes. Without a reliable
baseline and without the ability to verify authority and context
at the point of use, that cannot be corrected.
There is also an accountability issue.
The census currently provides a reference point to assess
representation, track disparities, and evaluate whether
commitments are being met. And if that reference point is
weakened, it becomes significantly harder to demonstrate whether outcomes
align with reality. This is not just a data issue,
it is a governance issue. In the electoral context, the
implications extend further. Data is used to maintain
electoral roll, confirm eligibility, and support
participation. If that data is incomplete or used
without verified authority, there is a risk to the
integrity of those processes.
This submission does not argue against administrative data.
It argues that it cannot replace a comprehensive census
without introducing systemic risk.
If the committee is minded to pro- ...
to proceed, then at a minimum,
data used for statistical or decision-making purposes must
carry verifiable information on its origin, authority,
and context, and systems must be able to demonstrate at the point of
use that the data remains valid for that purpose.
The issue is not whether government can use data, it is-
Lisa. Lisa. Lisa. Lisa, I'm just conscious we've got some questions, and-
Oh, sure
... we're running out of time.
Sure.
Right. First one from Mr. O'Connor.
Oh, look, Lisa, thanks very much. We heard from Len Cook that
really, that a census should be about dwellings and where
people, really relating back to
where they're living and, and, and aboding.
Do you think that the data that's being relied
on is going to be robust enough to really
tie back to where people are living,
to their dwellings?
I think it's much more than just dwellings.
If you're going to reflect the population, it needs to reflect the
population and not just where-
Not just the-
... they are living
... basis of it. Yeah.
I think you risk,
yeah. I think you risk
not being as robust as it needs to be in terms
of population data if you went down this track.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you. Can I just ask, obviously we are legislators,
and on your second page you talk about
suggest legislative consideration.
And you're suggesting we should recommend that the bill require that
any data used in its production of official statistics demonstrates the
authority, consent, and data providence, which are the matters you've been talking
about. How would you encapsulate that in a piece of
legislation? And I'm trying to understand, that's
an important principle, but I'm trying to understand how
you would see that coming through in a piece of legislation.
So, I think it needs to take into consideration
how Maori data is seen
and
different as just data. So, Maori data
is not neutral, it is relational.
So we see it as part of our whakapapa, as our...
That sort of thing. I think the distinction between just data,
which is seen often as a commodity, as to something that
is relational. And I think once that distinction is
understood, then it can quite easily be
embedded in legislation.
Okay. Very good. Hey, thank you for your presentation, Lisa.
It's been very helpful.
Thank you. Thank you.
Right. Now we're going to Jonathan Godfrey.
I understand I saw him coming on screen.
Mr. Godfrey, are you there?
Joining you now.
Right.
Mr. Godfrey, we're ready for you if you're there.
Just got to find the button to unmute. Hopefully you can hear me.
Oh, very good. We can hear you at least.
Lovely. You want to see me as well?
Probably preferable, but that's up to you.
Oh, well.
Takes a bit of time.
Video started, there we go.
All right, good.
Morning, John.
Beauty. Good morning. I'm going
to start with the thing that everyone should
understand
is that this bill takes away the certainty
of a census,
which is well-defined outside the law,
and offers an admin data first approach
with pretty much no explicit expectations
to go forth in an operate...
Sorry, to go forth and operate in an environment
where no explicit or implicit rules are
in place.
I do believe that admin data first is possible
in the long run, and I emphasize the long run.
I'm also a firm believer that more frequent
targeted surveys serve specific populations of
interest better than the official system
today. But there are plenty
of identified gaps in the admin data first system as
proposed,
and the ADF approach trades off
quality
in order to gain frequency.
We might understand what frequency looks like.
We have very little idea about the quality.
Ironically, the shortcomings are actually
exposable courtesy of the fact that we do currently have a census.
I suggest that even if admin data first is possible,
it is not yet actually proven to be a solution.
The future of census independent evaluation panel that
I chaired did not get to actually
assess the feasibility, et cetera,
of an admin data first. It was an assumption that the
move was on.
That would've been outside our terms of reference.
What we did conclude was that there is no way that admin
data first was feasible for the 2028
census.
So switching from a known to a plethora of unknowns,
seems rather unwise.
It is a gamble.
I suggest to you that while it might be described as something akin to an
old horse and cart,
you're being offered the chance to trade in that
horse and cart
for an as yet unbroken foal from a racehorse
stud
that has no track record.
Where is the protection if admin data first
fails? You have none.
So Parliament should not be gambling with New Zealand's data future like
this.
I've listed a bunch of recommendations and conditions from my area of
expertise where I can see shortcomings that need to be
proven before we can move on.
Others will have their own lists.
But that list of unknowns is getting long,
far too long.
From my area of expertise, we do not have
a sensible measure to indicate disability
status by admin data. We are not even close to
getting that.
You've asked questions today. I love people who ask questions, but what
it shows-Is the range of
unknowns
and your suppositions, and that's what they are.
They're suppositions because the bill does not bake in
your conclusions and your thoughts
and turn them into actual firm commitments.
The worst of those
is that we do not know if in fact the solution
of admin data first is ultimately, in fact,
cheaper than running a full field enumeration
census.
I want you to really think about what your role is.
Do you claim to be competent in assessing the quality
that will arise from an admin data first approach?
I hope the answer is at least discomfort
through to no, because there are plenty of
submitters that are suggesting they know better.
You've got to make a decision on what you are well-equipped to do.
Leave the stats problems to the experts.
Leave the admin data problems to the experts.
You are governors first and foremost.
The bill in its current form does not provide the
governance protections that a future official statistics
system needs.
In fact, it actually erodes what protections we do
currently have.
I tell my kids that intelligence is not what you know,
it's what you do when you don't know,
and it is now your judgment as governors that we are calling upon.
Where is your independent advice
beyond what the submitters are sharing with you from our
expertise?
We don't have all the information that we need to provide you with the
best independent advice.
We cannot offer you
the certainty that you need
to make the changes proposed in this bill.
And I hope I've left time for questions, sir.
Right. Well, thank you very much.
Members?
Yeah, look, it's
thought-provoking what you've said.
I'm going to go to Mr Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair, and thanks very much, Jonathan.
It was definitely thought-provoking.
You make the comment and you emphasize the point about
going to admin-led
in the long term. What in your mind is that long term?
It's a point way off after we've proven it's viable.
Okay, so you don't have in your mind how long you think it will
take New Zealand to get to that point?
The amount of time that it will take will depend on the amount of energy that
goes into improving the admin data systems
across government.
A program of work that currently doesn't exist
across government, I mean.
It will depend on improved governance,
both by Parliament and,
I suspect,
officials.
That doesn't currently exist.
There are solutions, I believe, to almost every problem,
but we do not have a work program. And to estimate when that is coming,
until such time as you have the whole list of requirements in
front of you,
is an exercise in foolishness, and so I'm not going to answer your question with a
firm date.
And I believe-
Helpful
... it can't be answered.
Thank you.
Dr Godfrey,
you've raised it and an earlier submitter raised it as well,
about
the quality of the admin data and whether it's actually
relevant
and the ability of the chief statistician to be able to require data
in a form that he currently, or she, whoever it may
be,
needs it to be so that it can be
used to provide
the information that the chief statistician's required to do.
Did your
panel look at that? And I was just testing, and
I'm keen to get your view on whether the bill, in your view,
provides the chief
statistician with enough authority to require
information we heard, like for inland
revenue records, that type of stuff, can require government
agencies to provide the data in a form that is readily
available and usable by Statistics New Zealand.
Have you had a look at that sort of element?
So the
answer is, in theory, it sort of attempts to,
but theory and practice are very, very different beasts.
If the chief statistician, the government statistician, was to say to the
commissioner of IRD, "We want occupations," how long
will it be until the commissioner actually changes
things and occupation is collected and filters through?
What compromises in the meantime does that lead to?
So,
there's an element of feasibility.
There's not an element of certainty.
And when you-
And the quality relies on certainty, not on, "Yeah, we
can do that." It's a, "We will do that.
It is happening."
So the bill
doesn't... Well, there's that gray area.
The statistician may say what they want,
but they can be blocked either through funding or whatever, or because it's
impossible with an IRD to do it, or a lack of willingness.
Although it
may not be expressed by a lack of willingness, it may be that just you don't do the
project if you're sitting in IRD. That's what your point is.
There's plenty of ways that bureaucrats can find a way to drag the chain.
Yeah. As we all know.
So if you look at the number of stats
question, I forget how many questions are in a census.
I forget. Am I thinking it's 300 or something? I don't know.
I'm looking around the room. No.
Anyone got an idea how many questions in
a census? But-
25.
25. It's more than that, isn't it? 25.
Yes.
So the 25 questions that are in a census,
did your panel look at those and get down to a level
of saying, of those 25,
with the available admin data that we know is available,
what sort of proportion? This sounds like a subjective question, but it is.
I think Stats NZ has, and would have an updated version of the
answer to that question.
Right. And-
But it is certainly not full coverage-
But do you have a view on-
Number one. And the quality in answering the quantity of questions
is quite valid. You have to also say to what
quality do we have admin data for each of those questions.
And almost across the board, the admin data was
not
a hope that you would want to bet your house on.
Right. Okay. That gives me-
So,
and you talked about the idea that the
statistician can request from other agencies.
But when upgrades happen in other database systems across
government,
where's the oversight that says, "You can't get rid of these three things
because they're already baked into what the government statistician expects from
us."
Right.
And they will be collected in exactly the same way.
Ethnicity is a lovely example of how badly you can do it in
a million ways.
Right. Hey, very helpful this morning.
Thank you for your time, Dr. Godfrey. Very good.
Cheers.
Right. Now we're going on to,
who's next, Rita?
See Ming Mok.
All right. Okay.
See Ming Mok. I think it's correct.
Yes. Kia ora.
Yeah, good morning, sir. Hopefully I pronounced your name correctly, but we've got
10 minutes with you.
Sorry, we've got five minutes with you.
We have read your submission, so you don't...
Perhaps just highlight the key aspects.
Thank you very much. Kia ora tātou.
I will be speaking a little more about my concerns about the bill's implications
for Asian communities,
as an independent researcher and advocate on Asian issues, though.
My full submission echoes concerns of many of the other submitters.
In my professional view as a data analyst and regular census and IDI
data user,
abandoning the full enumeration census in 2028 will
fundamentally damage the quality of the data that the government and Asian
communities rely on to plan for anything practical at all to do
with our communities. From health services, voter engagement, any kind of
investment really. Specifically due to the poor quality and
coverage of detailed Asian ethnic data in the admin data, as
Jonathan just inferred. We are risking knowing
less and less about a population that's getting bigger and bigger.
Asians are projected to be a third of the country by 2048.
And I'll explain a little bit about the level of detailed Asian ethnic group needed
to understand anything to do with the communities.
Of the four biggest ethnic categories at what we call level one ethnic
group, which these are umbrella categories.
There's European, Maori, Pacific Peoples, and Asians.
Well, Asians have the least in common with each other internally.
The fifth category, Mila, is actually the worst on that count.
But of the big four, Asian is the biggest, I guess, basket
case you could say.
Asia is 60% of the global population.
So here we're all ancestrally from completely different countries,
really far apart with no connection.
And when Asians get together in New Zealand and work on Asian
policy or research, we're mainly just splitting the category up so we can find
out anything real about who's actually getting diabetes, for example.
Is it my lot? No, it's your lot. As you go down the levels, it gets
more and more specific and more useful.
At level two, at least the Chinese and Indians are named, but everyone
else gets grouped into these other more weird leftover umbrella color categories.
Like Other Asian, which has the Japanese and the Afghans in
one group. Why would you ever put those two groups together?
What do they have in common? Think about it. I can't think of anything.
It's not until you get to level three ethnic categories that you get the
gold. It's the actual named ethnic groups split out for all the Asians beyond
the Chinese and Indians, and that's a third of all Asians and growing who are not
Chinese or Indian. That's not a small group, right?
It's 400,000 people right now, and that's going to be ballpark
850,000 by 2048 under Stats New Zealand projections.
It's a big group. But you need level three even to see the
ethnicities of that group. You need level three even to see the Filipinos.
It's the third largest Asian ethnic group, are well over 100,000 people.
That's two whole electorates worth of Filipinos, just to sharpen your minds.
And if you don't have a census, you won't even know where they are reliably.
Because the only reliable high-quality source for the level three ethnic group,
that gold standard ethnic level for Asians that can be
cross-tabulated with crucial social data is, you guessed it, it's the census.
Admin data just can't fill that gap right now.
It links in data from the census for that when you're in the IDI trying to do a
project. Admin data has two massive problems for level three Asian ethnic
group, and also frankly, for level two and one, depending on what you want to know.
Firstly, quality is bad, and secondly, coverage is bad.
Quality is bad as other submitters have spoken of because of
inconsistent collection. It's practically impossible for the vast
national landscape of fragmented public services to consistently collect ethnic
data at that level of detail on the front line.
It's not their priority, especially through constant waves of public sector reform
with each new government to a quality that can stand alone without
cross-referencing to the census.
In the IDI, we have admin data. It's great.
Census data has to be there. And also survey data.
That's like the three-legged stool.
If you take one out, it just kind of falls over.
It becomes recursive, and there's no backstop.Meanwhile, data
coverage is particularly bad for Asians because Asian new migrants use
public services less than other people for lots of reasons, like
ineligibility under their visa conditions, or language and cultural barriers,
and also the healthy migrant effect, less likely to need certain services straight
away. And this actually affects the fastest-growing Asian subgroups the most
because they're the newest. So you have that conundrum of data getting worse for
the groups changing the most quickly, that you already knew the least about within
the admin data system. The COVID vaccination drive is a good example of
that. It showed a massive scale of the admin data undercount for some Asian
subgroups who were racking up, like, 110% vaccination rates in the health service
user data, not because we're such high achievers, but because there's a huge slice
of the communities who are just not on the books.
So you can't use those books to count us.
Why would you do that? And without the census, you lose the most crucial and
reliable method for that count. And yes, the last two census were
badly done. And as Len Cook points out, it's not because the fundamental
method of a full enumeration census is bad, it's literally the
best and simplest way to do it, and some would say the most cost effective.
In conclusion, I strongly urge the committee to not progress this bill
until an independent expert evaluation has been carried out on the proposed option,
including its impact on Asian communities.
Because we are a part of this country, we're not a small group, and we do have the
right to be counted accurately, to be seen, to be visible. Thank you.
Right. We've got Camilla-
The third one.
One question from Camilla Village.
Thank you. Thanks for your submission.
And I think you've raised some really excellent points that we all need to
consider. I just wanted to go back, and I know a number of
submitters have talked about this independent review.
How would you envisage that that would work from a practical
sense in terms of the stage that the bill is at at the moment?
Is it
something that you think could happen in conjunction with our examination of the
bill, or is it a proposal to kind of put the brakes on this
happening at all? I just wanted to ask how you saw that
progressing.
Well, ideally, yes. I would like...
Personally, I would prefer the brakes to be put on completely, because as other
submitters have said, I don't think this bill is fit for purpose.
I don't think the approach is fit for purpose.
I think it's a really, really terrible idea for basically all the same reasons that
every qualified expert data person has said to
you today.
If it's a matter of procedure,
do whatever you can
to delay and to consider the expert technical advice
to see what can be done
to stop what is... I see it as a sort of a slow-motion disaster waiting to happen
by 2028, otherwise.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you for your submission, and understand the importance for the
Asian community. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Right. Now we've got Professor Heslet.
Nice to see you again.
Well, thank you for
putting up with me again.
Yeah. Unfortunately, I only got five minutes for you this morning.
So we have received your submission.
Okay.
First comment I'd make is that I wrote an article with George
Sieber in The Conversation, which might make supplementary reading.
George is the foundation professor of statistics at
Auckland University.
I'd like to just emphasize
initially that the important thing I think that I would
strongly recommend you do from a professional point of view
is to organize and have an independent
review, and I think that should happen before this bill proceeds further.
Now, I'm a little unusual. I've worked in universities
for 40 years, but
I've spent a lot of time working in government statistics departments,
in a couple of dozen internationally.
In many of them, although they're in third-world countries, because I've been
working for the United Nations,
response rates for the census are 99% plus,
and for surveys, very similar. And you need to ask yourselves
why it is it's falling here, and it's really to do with the fact
that data collection needs to be followed up by policies
that support people in a way that makes them feel that their data
collection has been useful.
So
that's not my responsibility.
I'm going to talk about the merits-- Not about the
merits, because you've got a lot of people talking about the merits.
I'm going to talk about the viability.
I'm going to make some comments from the engine room.
Because in those 20 countries, what I've worked on is census and
administrative data and survey data, and I think there are technical
aspects of what you're proposing that
from the discussion this morning are not properly understood.
So first of all, the IDI,
it consists principally of census data with additional data
added on, administrative data. But that administrative data is not
available for everybody from the census.
That problem will not go away if you remove the census.
What you're going to find is you've got an incomplete, what Stats New Zealand call
a spine,
but I prefer, if it were a census, to call it a backbone.
It's going to be incomplete because you're putting it together from multiple data
sources that don't match. Now, people have been talking about how
variables like ethnicity don't match.
You can't even match people. You can't even get one person's
record to match in one administrative database with another perfectly.
It just doesn't happen. There's a lot of work done
on statistical linkage, and that
statistical linkage introduces errors into the database
that make it difficult to use for analysis.
Further,
even if that were complete under some administrative first
arrangement with no proper census,
I must add that what you propose is not a census under any definition.
It's also not official statistics under any international
definition.There's going to be a major downgrade of New Zealand's
status in this statistical community.
So, that said, what have we got? We've got surveys and we've got a
backbone. If the backbone were the census, great.
It's the best we can do. But if the backbone is a
collection of administrative databases that don't fit together properly,
and they won't,
then what we have is a poor spine, Stats NZ
call it. It's not properly functional.
Secondly, when people talk about these surveys, what they're talking about
is small groups. But you need a survey for every small group, and I can tell
you that the list of small groups is very long, and you won't be able to do
something for everybody.
Further, when you do that, you've now got data, which is survey data,
which you need to amalgamate with
what might be a complete data set. Let's pretend it's a census for the moment.
Only some records can be put there.
People talk about this $100,000 and 100,000 people and
250,000 people, but there's actually four or five million people.
This is only going to be available for a very small number of them.
There are statistical techniques which I've worked on for the last 20 years that
attempt to
construct
databases from this or data from this, which is
not useful at an individual or household level.
It's only useful in aggregate.
And so what comes back to is that you talk about this
admin data. It's all right, we'll just add surveys. No, it isn't all right.
It's not going to work.
It's not going to work at all well.
So, I don't think what you've got is statistically
viable. I'm talking as a methodologist here of 20 years experience.
I don't think you've got anybody presenting to Parliament today who's
got anywhere near my experience in the engine room.
And I'm telling you, I'm advising you, don't do it.
The
Future's Census Independent Evaluation Panel, which Jonathan chaired,
has provided some very useful information, but their terms of reference
only allowed them to consider administrative data first
options.
I'll say that again. They were only allowed to consider administrative data
first options. Why? Who decided this?
Is there somebody mysterious that we don't know who's decided for
reasons that are incomprehensible to me to put forward a proposal
that is
largely untested, it's untried, it's unprecedented,
and it's premature.
Why?
And I'd reiterate Jonathan's point about governance.
I understand that you're responsible for governance, but please take
advice because you're not capable of understanding the
technical parts of this, and I certainly can't cover it in five minutes.
Now, I'd just like to comment on something that has come up.
It's just actually a statistic.
So people are talking about
families and
households and how
well that is actually being produced or could be produced under
administrative census. I quote the document I mentioned last time,
"Creating household and family information from administrative data,
progress, limitation, next census", published by Stats NZ in
March 2026.
Now, I think Stats NZ are doing a very good job in the circumstances,
but they've been given an impossible task, and it's time that a government
statistician was appointed who actually had the necessary
experience in official statistics.
Could we stop appointing generic managers to the job, please?
That's why things blew out in 2018 and '23.
The people appointed were generic managers.
They possibly also weren't good at listening.
Because there's expertise in Stats NZ, and certainly used to be, that could be
made great use of if the structure were right.
All right, so this is the report.
In the report, and you might think I'm cherry-picking, and perhaps I am, but
let's think about the number of households that are
correctly allocated. Now, by correctly, I mean this is a comparison between
administrative data back-- administrative data in 2023 and the
2023 census.
So what percentage of households do you think they got exactly right in terms of
composition? What would you find acceptable?
Because the answer is just under 50%.
So 50% of households are not correctly structured in the
administrative data through any mechanism that Stats NZ can think
up, and they've worked magic, let me tell you, but
magical thinking is not going to get us there.
Less than 50%.
Bit horrifying. And on this, you plan to
base major financial, social decisions.
I can only describe it as unwise. Thank you.
Hey, thank you, Professor. Unfortunately, we've run out of time.
But we heard-
Quick question.
We've heard a lot about calls for us to
get independent advice.
Mm-hmm.
In terms of,
would you imagine that that comes from New Zealand, or do you think this needs to
be-
Well, I think it definitely needs some international people.
International.
Because nobody's done it.
Yeah.
And that, I say that and you think, "Oh, yeah, maybe." But
I think nobody's done it because they've started off, as Ian Cook pointed
out,
and abandoned the idea because it doesn't work well.
And I think that if you're going to continue down this track, could you please have
a plan B?
All right. Thank you. Thank you again for
fronting up to the committee and passing on your views.
Right now,
we've-
Four weeks.
We've moved on
The chair. Kate, come please.
Thank you very much for
allowing me to come and speak to you.
I'm not going to go on at length about my submission because I know you've all read
it closely.
Of course.
There's about three points I want to make.
Firstly, my own experience. I've used census data
since about 1982. I've used census data that was
collected in the 19th century, and census data that's been
collected in the 21st century, so I know very well
how the census has developed. I know
how it's articulated with administrative data, and
I've used lots of administrative data sets, from building
consents through to benefit data,
through to
data around health and service consumption,
a whole range of things. The critical issue about the census
is it's not a census of population, it's a census of
population and dwellings. And why is it-- And I think that,
Mr. O'Connor, you brought this up previously.
Why do dwellings matter? It's not because dwellings matter in themselves, although
they are critical infrastructure in New Zealand that,
unlike ice cream, if we change from strawberry to raspberry, we can do it quickly.
We can't do that with housing quickly.
But it's because it's a mechanism that you
understand how families are forming, who makes
up families, and who can consume. We often talk about
demographics and population, and really, it's about what
do our families and our households look like, some of which are one
person, and that's the unit which is the social and
economic driver in any society, in any
economy. The great power of the census, in one
place, it matches those relationships
immediately in one data point at one
moment in time.
We have lots of data sets which we're argued are going to
be able to be matched. I spent an awful lot of time
matching data sets from consents to valuation
data, to LINZ data, household data, and so
forth. And I can tell you, it is a tedious,
but also very difficult and expensive job.
My view about this proposal is that it
not only downgrades what we have
relative to the census population and dwellings, but it
is going to be more expensive. The promises that are made
are completely undemonstrated, and there are claims about this
being something that's happening overseas a lot.
Actually, overseas are very, very different, including Britain,
where they have now recommitted to the census after five years of
very close analysis of what administrative data can
do. People have talked about administrative data coverage.
I've used a lot of administrative data in evaluation.
My concern is not just matter of coverage.
That's certainly important in terms of our whole population, but it's
also the accuracy. I myself had two
unique identifiers in the health system because someone put in a
K
on one record and a C on another. Took me a wee while to
sort that out, but in the time, didn't impose too much, I
hope, on the health system.
Addresses are almost impossible to
verify, and people within those addresses are also pro--
Many people use them as post response because they have to for banking
reasons, for benefit reasons, a whole number of reasons.
So it's not just about coverage, it's also about accuracy.
It's not just about ethnic categorization, identification.
All of those are very important, but it's at the very core of what we
do. So I would really advise that we put the brakes on
this. Think very carefully, because my prediction
is you'll get less, and it'll cost you more.
It'll be misleading both in terms of our understanding of our
community, but misleading in terms of policy. So that's all.
Right. Thank you. I've just got one brief question from Mr. O'Connor.
Pedantic, but the difference between a household, because you talk
dwelling-
Yeah
... Glenn talked households.
Yes.
Are they different?
Well, they are and they aren't. If you've got people living in a dwelling-
That's it
... those that live in that dwelling are a household.
You can have a dwelling with no one living in it.
There's about 100,000 of those dwellings.
So we do actually need to know and understand both.
Of course, our household may be made up of many
things, of different family types, and understanding that is
really important. And one of the things I hear as a housing
researcher, people say, "Oh, well, the number of dwellings we've got doesn't keep
up with population." It's not population growth that matters.
It does matter, but that's not the core thing.
It's how households form that matter.
So we should use households.
Family formation. We should be thinking about households and
making sure we understand who's in them and under what
circumstances. Nowhere do we know how people
access through either rental, home ownership, or other forms.
Hey, thank you very much, Kate.
Thank you.
Great.
Right. Do we need some council business?
No.
Okay. Good morning,
council trade
unions. Sandra and Jake, hopefully.
Good morning. Nice to see you.
Yeah, nice to see you.
Good morning
Kia ora toto ngā mihi nui.
I'm Sandra Gray, and beside me is Jack Foster.
I'm the president of the Council of Trade Unions, and we are really grateful for
this time
with the Justice Committee to talk about this bill.
I do want to open up by saying our views will reiterate those of
many of the submitters you've heard, and that we think the bill
before you
sets out generational change to the structure of census
that could be very harmful to a whole range of
organizations.
And we need to think about this and put it under further scrutiny.
And why do I mean that it's going to be harmful for a whole range of organizations?
Well, we, as the Council of Trade Unions, use census data to
understand employment, occupations, income
across different parts of the population, and we use it often
when we are engaging in democratic activities such as this,
presenting to select committees.
And if there is a change in that data and a degradation of that data,
we will not be able to participate as fully in democratic processes
because that information will not be readily
available. But we are not the only civil society organization
that uses census data to make sure that we
are advancing the needs of working people, of communities, of
iwi hapū.
So we do urge you to think about the impact more
broadly on those of us who engage in democratic
moments, such as select committees,
in writing reports, in engaging in the
democratic conversation. But also, we
are very concerned that what this bill in its current
form would do is put blinkers on the information you, as
politicians, that the House of Representatives would have, put
blinkers on the whole of government because the information
has not yet been shown that it will be full enough or fulsome enough.
And we don't think any government should have blinkers on when making decisions.
You need the best information and data you can get.
So we think it is critical to make sure there's thorough
scrutiny of this bill, a thorough scrutiny of the likely
impacts on democratic decision-making and on democratic
engagement. But for a little bit more detail of some of the concerns, I'm going to
hand to Jack.
Thank you, Sandra, and thank you, committee. Good to be in front of you today.
So
I'll just flesh out our concerns a little bit further, and you'll see that they
resonate with many of the statistical experts that you've spoken to,
which we're not statistical experts, but we are users of census
data.
So we're not necessarily opposed to updating the way that data is
collected, but the key is that we need to make
sure that the data is of high enough quality, is reliable, is
consistent
with our longitudinal time series, and so on.
And we know that concerns have been flagged throughout this process
by Statistics New Zealand, by the Future Census Independent
Evaluation Panel, by independent experts,
regarding, among other things, the quality, the comparability,
the granularity of administrative data,
and particularly
concerns raised for particular groups such as
Māori, Pasifika, disabled people, and rainbow people.
So just a couple of examples to pick that out.
So it's acknowledged in the regulatory impact statement that there will be a
reduction in data quality in the next five to 10 years in
some areas if the proposed changes go ahead.
So that in itself is of concern.
However, of even greatest concern is that we've not been able to find
in the documentation accompanying the bill a detailed analysis
of the specific data that would be affected, the level at which it would be
affected, and how this could realistically be mitigated.
So we think these kinds of questions really need to be addressed
before government would move ahead with such a
large change to the most important data collection
process in the country.
Another point of concern, and this kind of goes more towards
lawmaking practice, is that it doesn't appear that a full regulatory
impact statement was prepared for this bill.
So the RIS that's linked to online
from the bill is dated 28th of April 2025 and is
explicitly flagged as an interim regulatory impact
statement. So there are multiple unanswered and/or only
partially answered questions in that interim RIS
that we would expect as a matter of sound lawmaking
process to be fleshed out before a final decision was made.
These include things such as the data quality that can be realistically
achieved, the variables not well represented in administrative
data, the financial costs of improving administrative data
to a sufficient level, and you've heard from statistics experts
that it's likely that would be extremely costly.
And also the potential project management risks associated with such a
major structural change. We don't have confidence that such a
large change would be able to be managed within the short time frames that
there are available, particularly bearing in mind the
challenges of previous censuses.
So given these uncertainties, and the lack of some
thorough
processes in the development of this legislation, our recommendation,
like many others, is to pause this legislation until an
independent review of the proposed changes and their implications has
been conducted and, importantly, has been made publicly available
for comment.
So you've got the future independent census
panel could be, for example, recommissioned to provide such a
review.The review should consider and report on data
quality and comparability issues for all
census questions and population groups.
We need that kind of granular analysis of the potential
implications. We should outline options for mitigating potential negative
implications, and the realistic costs associated with doing
so.
So to finish up, in our view, the census is far too important to
risk moving ahead with a substandard reform,
and we need to do this properly. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. Do you want a question? A question from Councillor Village.
Thank you. Thanks very much for your submission, and for appearing in front of
us today. I know that the Union movement has
been concerned around mis and disinformation, and one of the aspects
of
the current census and the way it's compiled is
engagement with official
government-mandated people
in providing that information. Do you have any reflections on
that aspect of data collection or how that might be
addressed in either administrative data collection
or in a more broader census
collection? Thank you.
Thanks. That's a really good question and quite a difficult one.
So we acknowledge that there are increasing challenges that
officials are facing in collecting important data.
And that's not just in the census, but that goes to many important
surveys that Statistics New Zealand does.
One of the most important from our perspective is the Household Labour Force
Survey,
which has seen declining response rates, and Statistics New Zealand have had to
make the decision to cancel certain additional surveys that are
attached to that HLFS because of declining response rates.
So that's a real problem. It's not unique to New Zealand.
We understand it's
common around the developed world.
The problem is multifaceted. We don't have all the answers, but I would
say that a lot of the problems go to structural issues of
poverty, inequality, declining trust in government among certain
communities. The answer to that is not to
lower our standards around what kind of data we can collect.
It's to address those structural problems in our society.
If you've got people who don't trust government officials, that's often because
they're from marginalized communities.
And so addressing those root causes is the real challenge.
Not easy, of course, but we should be realistic about what's involved.
All right. Hey, thank you very much to both of you for presenting this morning.
That was good to hear from you.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to go to the New Zealand Law Society, who I
see they're online.
So I though they were here. Come
on
up.
Yeah.
People can see you.
Right. Good morning.
Nice to have you. We've got 10 minutes with you.
We're running a little bit behind schedule, but-
Yes.
The floor is yours. We've read-
Tenna
... read your submission.
Well, tena koutou katoa. Good morning. My name is Bryce Lyle.
I'm a barrister, but appear today as a member of the Law Society's
Public Law Committee.
I was to appear with Mr. Fletcher, who's now been unable to
attend. He was going to address, in particular, the parts of the
submission addressed to the process for amendments of constitutional
significance and the lack of a transitional
boundary review. So I'm happy to try to address any
questions that may arise on those topics, but it
might be that the Law Society files a supplementary submission to address
any questions that arise if I'm
not able-
Okay
... to do so.
As you said, the Law Society filed a submission dated the 15th of April
2026, addressed to both bills, and that's what I'll briefly speak to
today.
Broadly, the Law Society supports any measures which
ensure more reliable and accurate census data can be gathered and used
for electoral purposes.
However, the Law Society is concerned that the bills and the policy
process behind them in particular, haven't meaningfully engaged with
key constitutional issues which arise.
To address the Law Society's concerns, further policy
work is needed before the bills proceed, if they are to
proceed, including allowing for meaningful public
consultation on the proposals
and meaningful engagement with Maori.
Taking the issues that we've addressed in our submission one at a
time, I'll speak to four points over the next couple of minutes.
The first is the policy process for amendments of constitutional
significance and the lack of public consultation,
those inconsistencies with the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi,
and finally, the decision not to undertake a transitional boundary review.
The first of those, the Electoral Act,
provides for the calculation of electoral districts
and requires the review after each periodical census.
That helps to ensure New Zealand's electoral districts continue to have roughly
equal numbers of people and, consequently, equal representation
among electors.
Now, the mechanical parts of that act which allow for this are
reserve provisions under Section 268
of the Electoral Act,
recognizing the important constitutional role that those
provisions play in our democratic
arrangements.
The Law Society's position is that any proposals to amend
those reserve provisions should also be considered as inherently
constitutionalAnd that any amendment should
only be made following gathering and consideration of evidence to show
the proposed changes are appropriate and necessary to achieve the
underlying policy objective.
Should require meaningful and robust consultation with the public
and with Maori where the changes engage obligations under Te Tiriti
o Waitangi, the Treaty,
and should involve careful consideration of the costs and benefits of such
amendments. And the concern,
really for the Law Society,
is that on the materials received so far, we do not have evidence of a
robust process addressed to those factors.
That flows into my second point,
that no public consultation was undertaken in
relation to the changes in the Electoral Bill,
despite it obviously addressing the
amendments to entrenched provisions of constitutional
significance.
In particular, and we do set out some further considerations, but
in particular, this has meant that members of the public have had no opportunity to
offer alternative suggestions for when boundary reviews should occur.
And there's been no
education function served for those members of the public about
how these provisions work and how that relates to the constitutional arrangements
of Aotearoa.
The Law Society is concerned that
the amendments in the Electoral Bill may impact not only the
legitimacy of representation, but also its perceived
legitimacy, and that goes hand in hand with those
educative issues that I flagged.
While these bills did receive cross-party support during the first
reading, that should not be considered a substitute for a meaningful public
engagement and consultation
process, particularly given that cross-party support was only sought
after key policy decisions had been taken.
Moving to the
issues concerning inconsistency with the principles of Te Tiriti o
Waitangi,
and this is at 2.11 of the Law Society's submission.
Officials have identified that the amendments are likely to be of interest to
Maori,
both because of the calculation of the Maori electoral population directly
influences the number of reserved seats for Maori.
And that they have identified that
the amendments are likely to engage the Crown's
obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi and its principles,
as the inability to have a boundary review ahead of the 2029 general
election will impact the proportionality of representation and the
size, number, and boundaries of Maori electoral
districts.
And despite that, no consultation has been undertaken with
Maori on the Electoral Bill,
acknowledging that it does appear some limited consultation has been
undertaken on the other bill
that we're addressing today.
The Law Society would urge the Select Committee to seek advice from officials on
this matter, and to ensure that any resulting legislation is
consistent with Te Tiriti
and its principles.
The final matter the Law Society wishes to address today,
this is 2.14 of the submission,
is that the Electoral Bill doesn't provide for a transitional boundary
review, meaning electoral boundaries will not be
redrawn ahead of the 2029 general election.
That decision appears to have been taken despite officials confirming
that transitional review was the preferred approach,
that a review would ultimately increase the perceived legitimacy
of representation in 2029, and it would allow for Maori
population to be recalculated ahead of the 2029 general
election.
It's unclear to the Law Society why the decision has been made to proceed
with the minister's preferred option, despite the concerns raised by officials.
Yeah.
So in conclusion,
the committee, in the Law Society's view, should seek further advice to
ensure any changes, particularly
on the entrenched Electoral Act provisions, have public support and are
treaty consistent. And if the bills proceed, the relationship
between the two bills should be clearly explained to the public
to make sure that they're properly informed about what these changes mean for New
Zealand's electoral arrangements.
That's my whip through of the-
All right. Hey, well thank you. Thank you for a sterling job,
on behalf of your colleague as well.
We'll certainly be asking about 2.14 that you refer to
around the '29
electoral boundaries for Maori. But, thank you.
I think-
Carl had a question.
I think, no.
Okay. Hey, thank you very much, Mr.
Lyle,
for your contribution this morning. Very much appreciate that.
No worries.
Right. Now, we're going to the New Zealand College of Public Health Medicine.
And I think there you are, Vanessa.
Nice to see you. Are you on your own?
I thought you were having someone else as well.
Professor Sir Colin is here as president of the college, and he'll start.
Okay. We've all read your submissions.
I'll just reiterate to everyone, the committee has read submissions,
right? So,
allowing us some time to ask questions is actually quite important.
Well, thank you very much. I'm
Colin
Tukuitonga. I'm president of the New Zealand College of Public Health
Medicine. The college is a
professional body of public health medicine
specialists. Public health medicine is the branch of
medical practice dedicated to improving population health,
preventing
disease and injury, and advocating for measures to
improve health and wellbeing. Why are we interested in this
bill? We provide information advice
to a variety of stakeholders based on census
data.
We provide evidence
and information to all manner of people
who are involved in improving
population health. I've been playing around with admin data for
near 40 years, and I can tell you
I have little confidence in our admin data
systems.
They're not designed for this purpose.
Some are better than others, no doubt.
To speak further to our
submission, I'm going to ask my colleague, Vanessa Silach, to
expand on a few points. Thank you very much.
Thanks, Colin, and thanks so much to the committee for providing us with the
opportunity to speak. In brief, we're extremely concerned about the
proposed shift away from a full field enumeration survey
to an admin-first approach. We've got three main concerns.
One, inadequate review. The proposal represents a
major change in methodology of a core government
function. Such a major change shouldn't be undertaken without
genuinely independent and robust review.
Reviewers should have the freedom to recommend a range of options, including
retaining and improving the full enumeration survey.
The reviewers should include national and international experts, people with
expertise in Māori Pacific data sovereign- data sovereignty,
as well as health sector and other key government users of
census data. The findings of the review
should be clearly incorporated in any subsequent proposal
regarding the future of the census.
Two, inadequate testing of the replacement.
The proposed replacement has not yet been fully detailed and
has not yet been tested to ascertain whether it will be fit for
purpose. A decision to discontinue the full field
enumeration survey would be premature until we know that its
replacement will be suitable. This is particularly important given
that the only countries that have moved to an admin-first approach are
those with key prerequisites, a personal
identification system for the whole population, and reliable
population and address registers that we simply don't have in place here in New
Zealand.
Thirdly, inadequate economic considerations.
One of the major reasons for proposing to discontinue the full field
enumeration survey is its cost.
It's simply not possible to assess the economic impact of the
proposal because it's unclear what the cost or the quality
of the replacement will be. Furthermore, if there's a reduction in the
quality of census data, there is no
consideration of the economic implication of decisions
made on poorer quality data. In summary, we
strongly oppose the proposal in the
bill. We think that the proposal is premature because it hasn't been
adequately reviewed. We don't know if the replacement will be fit for purpose,
what it will cost, what the quality of the data will be, and we don't know what the
economic implications will be if data quality and decisions based on the
data are compromised. Thanks so much for your time, and we'd welcome your
questions.
Thank you. One from Camilla Village.
Thank you both very much for your written submission. I just had a question.
In terms of the changes, which obviously you've outlined the concerns
that you have around it, do you think that these changes
could have the ability to impact negatively on health
outcomes if implemented?
Miss...
Absolutely, because the decisions that we
make and that... Well, I can speak to the health system because that's where I'm
familiar. The decisions about funding are based
on our populations. So fundamentally, if we don't know who the
population is, we don't know how to allocate resources
appropriately. The talk about
providing alternatives such as admin-first approaches
ignore the fact that we ultimately need a
robust denominator. We need to know everyone who's there, not just the people who
are already accessing the service.
And that's the fundamental problem with an admin-first approach.
It relies on accessing health and other systems in order for people
to be counted. So therefore, we're actually not able to make efficient
uses of our scarce resources because we don't properly
know who we're actually
supposed to be serving.
Thank you. Can you take that
comment down to another level, Vanessa?
Because obviously it's pretty easy to work out what the population is on any given
day with admin data already available.
So you know the total population.
I presume what you're talking about is disaggregating it into
ethnic groupings, age groupings,
whatever, because they'll have different health profiles.
I presume that's the case.
That's right, yeah. Because you need to have that detail to be able to
determine the funding for
specific services, the funding for specific services and locations,
the funding for particular types of people.
So yeah, it is about that. It isn't just the total, it's the
disaggregation at an accurate level so that you're ensuring that
people aren't missing out.
But working back upwards, because presumably, I don't know
what proportion of the population end up going through some form of
medical assistance or having a medical doctor or whatever.
I presume the coverage is very high.
You, and I say you, the health-
... health industry, if I can put it that way, including Health New Zealand,
whatever, doctors, there's plenty of research around health, all that sort of
stuff. You actually are the guardians of the data at a primary level,
which obviously goes up to Health New Zealand.
They do a lot of analytical work. Auckland University does
data craft, analytics, do a lot of work.
So
aren't you already capturing a lot of that data, which is actually a lot more
granular than what you get out of 30-odd questions in a
census?
Yeah. And actually, the thing is, as what's previously been
described, is that we need a stem,
we need a spine-
A spine
... we need a backbone. And that's the problem that we have,
because everything gets referred to the spine.
And if ultimately the backbone of your data system, which is what is
currently in place with our full field enumeration system, is taken
away, we're left with something that is cobbled together.
And whilst absolutely we are doing everything we can with the
data that we already have available, the issue is that those
departments, even the health department,
we have a single identifier. We have a national health
identifier. And even within the health system, having a single
identifier, we still have issues with linking
data across different data sets and different data services.
Another challenge is that the data are being collected in a
way that's not actually for
what we would call a secondary use in this situation.
So the people that are collecting the data, the doctors, the nurses, the
hospital administrative people, their focus is on delivering healthcare
services to the patients that are sitting in front of them.
Their focus isn't on directly around actually the
important funding decisions that people like yourself are making in terms of
allocation of funding. So there's a real disconnect, or there
can be a disconnect between the data that's collected at the front
line for operational purposes and the data that's needed for planning
purposes. And that's why the census is so important in its current
format because it does that in a way that is the most
rigorous form. We regard it as the gold standard in terms of actually
collecting that backbone, and that's why it's used as the backbone.
Right.
Can I just add, Mr. Chairman, we're not guardians of the data.
We're users of the data.
Right.
That is not our responsibility. And the various
admin data sets are governed and owned by various entities and
agencies. We are not
the guardians. We are users like a whole lot of other
people, and this is why we're concerned about the changes that are being
proposed.
All right. Hey, well, thank you, Sir Colin and Vanessa for your
contribution this morning.
Thank you.
Although we now just moved into the afternoon, but thank you very much.
Right. Now we're going to,
who are we going to now?
Rural Health.
Who left?
Dr. Grant Davidson.
Yeah. Dr. Grant Davidson.
That's you. I just saw you come in. How you going?
Thank you. And thanks for your time.
I'm not here to speak to you as a statistician.
I'm here to represent the people furthest from Wellington, which is the
20% of New Zealanders who are living and working in rural and
remote areas throughout the country and producing 80% of our
export earnings through agricultural,
tourism and other areas, but who have the poorest health outcomes
of anyone in the country. And we have only been
able to determine that recently, and you're welcome to have our Rural Health
Snapshot. I brought copies for you all.
That has only been available through the ability
to
use census data over the last two census.
I think you sent it to every MP, didn't you?
I did send it to every MP. Thank you for remembering that, Andrew.
I remember looking at
it. Yes.
What I want to focus on today, you've read
our submission
so far, but some of the statistics that we've been able to pull
together, suicide rates 64% higher than urban
rates, mortality rates 2.5 times higher, much higher
smoking rates,
lower immunization rates, fewer formal qualifications and lower
incomes, making it hard for rural students to pursue health
careers.
If we can't have those statistics readily at hand and
compare, then those rural communities are going to be
even worse affected in the future.
I was interested in your comment, Andrew, that you could
easily achieve population data on any day of the week.
That's
complete rubbish, that Stats New Zealand estimate
that the administrative
methodologies will underreport by 10 to 15%, and that will be
worse in rural areas.
Not everyone has got an MHI number.
There is a large percentage of unenrolled patients,
especially in rural and remote areas.
So we've looked at the
bill in front of us, and we focused on whether that has
been viewed through a rural lens, which is called rural proofing, and NPI
says that all bills and policy makers should look at
rural proofing their policies. There was no consultation with
rural people, and there were no experts of rural
health in any of the advisory panels that we've looked at.
The geographical classification for health, of which all of our
data is based on,
which was only developed in 2021, is based on the
smallest Stats New Zealand SA1
figures, and those are very small population
units, and they will be
the most impacted by the methodology that's being suggested going
forward.
So I'd just like to make four key points.First is that rural
people are a priority population under the Healthy Futures Pae
Ora legislation.
And to advocate for health and wellbeing of rural New Zealanders, we need flexible
and accurate population data. The definition of rural that has been
widely accepted and adopted for health context is nuanced,
detailed, and aligns with Stats New Zealand small area geographies.
It recognizes that health districts and local government regions contain both
urban and rural communities. We need accurate information for all
rural people at these small area geographies so that we have a full picture of
rural New Zealand. This bill risks reducing the accuracy of this
information. For example, while rurality has recently been used with a
New Zealand health survey, the sample size means that different types of
rurality cannot be disaggregated, and it is not possible to
examine the intersections of rurality with other key characteristics such as
ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic deprivation.
A full enumeration census fills an important role,
and it's thanks to existing current census data that we're able to track health
outcomes which, as I've said, are in our health snapshot.
Moving to an administrative data and survey-based approach will
disproportionately reduce the quality and accuracy of rural data.
Stats New Zealand indicate that the accuracy and completeness of administrative
data is lowest at the small area level.
Since rurality is defined at the small area level, that means rural communities
will have the worst quality information about themselves.
This will be compounded by other issues, including the expected lower quality
of information about those other aspects, ethnicity, gender, disability,
and other socioeconomic characteristics.
The proposed surveys to fill a gap in administrative data
won't fill that gap and provide the level of fine-grained
information that we need. When taken together, this means that many
small rural community groups are likely to become effectively
invisible.
In our current data-driven world, a lack of accurate information will lead to poor
investment decisions and wasted resources.
Given the proof in health inequalities that rural people face, we can't
afford to ignore these people such that their outcomes are not able to be
measured.
Third, we don't believe that the rural sector or the rural health sector in
particular, has been adequately consulted about the proposed changes.
We've seen no examples of those groups being involved
in any advisory capacity, and that needs to
be rectified going forwards.
Just want to
draw attention to the fact that the current coalition government is
focused on health targets and outcomes.
While that may be a good thing because
we do want improved health outcomes, if we haven't got an
evidence base for investment and accountability for that investment, then we'll be
failing those communities.
The outcome target-focused approach means that accurate data is even more
important, and the changes proposed will make rural data
invisible, which will be a huge disservice to those communities in terms
of focusing on the targets.
So in conclusion, if the decision is made to proceed with the bill in its current
form, you'll be making a decision that will effectively write off the health
of New Zealanders living in rural and remote communities.
We believe that an independent expert review is needed before any
legislative change proceeds, and that an independent assessment
of the impacts of the proposed changes on rural data,
specifically rural health data, is undertaken.
Thanks for your time.
Right. Thank you, doctor. We've got a question from Camilla Village.
Thank you.
Similar line of questioning to the last submission.
So you've talked about rural communities being invisible possibly if
these changes go ahead, and also in your written submission, talked about the
risks in relation to those communities with
those data sets not being visible.
I asked a previous submitter about the outcomes in
terms of health for the communities they were talking about.
What would you imagine could be in, say, 10 years, the outcomes
if we go down this path?
Well, if we can't see what's happening in those communities through clear
and accurate data, then there'll be no resources
directed to those communities, so the health outcomes will fall even further
behind than they are at the moment. That's our major fear.
So the data you're getting at the moment,
is that sufficient
in terms of allocation of resourcing and stuff like that?
Do you feel like the data you're getting at the moment is up to scratch?
Well, for the first time ever, the data is beginning to be up
to scratch in that Health New Zealand is disaggregating its major
data repositories by GCH
category, the Geographical Classification of Health.
So we're actually getting disaggregation of health
data by its rurality or urbanity, if you
like, if there is such a word.
Is that occurring, A, there's now a willingness to do it, but is that
occurring as a result of a question coming out of census, or is that
occurring because they're using the data more
appropriately to get a better view on the rural communities?
We need the census data to be able to provide the
GCH classifications because of the population distributions.
That is not coming out of Health New Zealand or other administrative data sets.
That comes out of the census.
It comes out of the baseline census.
Yeah. Okay, cool.
All right. Hey, thank you very much-
Appreciate your time
... for your submission this morning.
Thank you.
Good.
Right.
Now, are we on to Moira Money?
Yes.
Moira, are you there with us this morning or this
afternoon?Moira,
are you there?
I am. Sorry.
Oh, very good
Just figuring out the technical side of things. Kia ora.
Lovely to see you. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you.
And we have
read your submission. Thank you.
Wonderful. Nga rangatira. Tena koutou. Hei mahei ha.
Kia koutou katoa. My name is Moira Clunie.
I'm appearing here as a co-lead for Tingako Kahukura, though I was also a member of
the Future Census
independent evaluation panel last year.
Our focus with Tingako Kahukura is on Rainbow communities, on q***r,
trans, intersex, takatāpui people, people who are māhū, vakasalaulua,
faʻafafine, akavaʻine, leiti,
pākēfefine, people who are non-binary or have variations of
sex characteristics. Many other names and labels.
Rainbow people exist in every place and in every whānau,
but historically haven't often been visible in official statistics.
Here today really to talk about the importance of high-quality data for our
communities and want to ask you to delay this bill and to invest
in Stats New Zealand to allow them to continue a full
enumeration census approach as they design future high-quality
approaches.
We work towards an Aotearoa where Rainbow people grow up feeling safe, valued, and
that they belong in all the places where they live, learn, and access healthcare
and social support. And we do this work because we're not there yet.
This year, we're acknowledging the 40th year of homosexual law reform, which was a
mark of acceptance and inclusion, a while ago, back at the time that I was in
primary school.
But at the same time this year, we're also challenging political attacks on
transgender women and children, for example, in the form of a puberty blocker ban
and rhetoric about who should be allowed to play sport or use the bathroom.
Our communities face higher rates of violence, family rejection, and social
marginalization, and these lead to higher rates of suicidality and mental
distress, homelessness, and addiction.
These outcomes obviously aren't universal, but as a population, they're more
likely, and they're heightened for people who are also experiencing
racism, navigating disability, or are marginalized in other ways.
So we know this sort of thing from decades of research and from community
experience, but until recently, we haven't had good
population-level official data that meant we could compare our
population experiences with other people in New Zealand.
So this has meant that our health and social disparities have been systemically
under-recognized in government strategies
and across health and social service systems, and responses to
address these are
under-resourced. Census 2023 was the first one to
include questions around Rainbow identities, which came
after decades of community advocacy, almost since the time of homosexual law
reform.
Data doesn't change much in isolation, but the kind of insights we've seen already
published from Census 2023 could allow government agencies,
service providers, and communities to design and resource solutions in a way that
hasn't really been possible before, and that impact is especially
over time as we see trends emerge. So
we've seen progress, but the proposal being considered in this bill will take us
backwards. As others have told you, as Stats New Zealand has
acknowledged in their community consultation documents, the shift to an
admin data-first census model will result in significantly
reduced data quality for the Rainbow population.
Some insights just won't be available, especially for smaller population groups
within the wider Rainbow population.
Part of that is because there aren't any administrative data sources
about our identities, about sexuality, transgender experience, or innate variations
of sex characteristics. They don't exist, and they're not likely to exist in the
near future or potentially ever.
It's not usually reliable, relevant, safe, or desirable to have
government agencies collecting this sort of information.
For example, I mentioned the issue around the puberty blocker
ban. At the moment, in a time we're seeing healthcare denied to children on the
basis of being transgender, it's not surprising at all that a lot of people don't
provide accurate information about their gender to health services.
So
some of the markers that we might rely on are less reliable
for transgender and intersex and q***r people.
Rainbow questions could be asked in the census attribute survey.
That's the proposal at the moment.
But the size of that survey will mean data quality will be poor or
unreliable for small population groups or regional analysis, and
we essentially won't have the
denominator effect. We won't have those population counts of how many Rainbow
people there are across the country.
There isn't an obvious way to mitigate the impact of this proposed
change on Rainbow populations. I want to acknowledge Stats New Zealand has done
wonderful work talking to Rainbow community experts to keep this
conversation going, but as far as we can see, there just isn't the maths for this
yet. The move from complete national enumeration
proposed in this bill will just mean that we lose the level of insight that was
possible for the first time with the 2023 census.
There isn't a different methodology we could use to replace that.
So what's being proposed in this bill will give New Zealand a worse public
stat system. As we said in our submission, the production of official
statistics requires investment, and that's a political choice
that you're able to make. So I'm asking you to make a different choice.
This bill will disproportionately affect Rainbow populations as well
as Māori, disabled people, Pacific populations, rural
communities, as we just heard, and other groups that aren't reflected
reliably in admin data. So I want to recommend that you delay this
change and invest further in a full enumeration approach while
building in more sources of administrative data over time as those become
more reliable. Kia ora. Thanks for your time.
Welcome any questions.
Hey, thank you, Moira. Very nice.
Quick one.
Got a question from Todd Stevenson.
Thanks, Moira. I suppose it's good that
you were involved in the Future Census independent evaluation panel.
I suppose that's really good, and that you've-
And we've got your submission, you've caught the problems.
You were just mentioning, though, an attribute survey at the moment's the
suggested solution from Stats New Zealand. Is that right?
And do you have any details on what that might look like?
My understanding of the proposed model is that Stats New Zealand will
conduct an attribute survey each year.
So they'll do the survey of 5% of the population-
Yeah
... whatever the proposed number is now.
And my understanding is that they'll continue to ask the rainbow
demographic questions in that survey.
So, for small amounts of the population, we'll
have rainbow demographic data. There's no other way of
counting-
Yeah
... the overall population or knowing how reliable that is.
And those
numbers, the size of that survey isn't big enough to make
valid statistical-
Yeah
... analysis around smaller groups within the population.
No, good. No, a good submission, and just like the rural
one before, I think, yeah, it's a point well made that-
Yeah
... these are the types of groups that will potentially be missed out
by moving to this different model. So, thank you.
Thank you.
Right. Now we're going to Blythe Simpsons. I think we've got Dr.
Godfrey again, and Rose Wilkinson.
Just to check, Blythe Simpsons is having some tech issues.
Oh, are they? Should we go to the next one after?
The next. There's another one.
Yeah.
Right. So should we just pause for a moment?
Is that what you're suggesting?
Yeah. I recommend it.
They can't just come in by phone?
We're working on it.
Right.
Be right.
We're just going to have a hiatus of your beaming image, having technical
issue just trying to connect our next submitter.
So if you're wondering what's going on, that's what we're waiting for.
So
we've
got the Koi Tū Centre. Are you with us here?
Yes.
Oh, is that you?
Oh, yeah, please.
Yeah.
Oh, we wish you'd put your hand up before. Please, sit down.
Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Hema Chudasama. Hi, how are you?
Very good.
Excellent.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you committee for the
opportunity to speak here today on behalf of Koi Tū, the
Centre for Informed Futures. I'd like to extend an apology
from Sir Peter Gluckman. This is a topic that he is
very much passionate about and would have loved to have been here in person
to
converse with you.
I'm going to take that you've read our submission,
and I will start with what I believe is at the heart of this bill,
which is really
raising a fundamental issue for what liberal
democracies face. Which is we
need the availability of reliable,
trustworthy data to support long-term
decision-making and informed long-term decision-making.
And high-quality data is an integral part
of the liberal democracy infrastructure and
maintaining
public trust in an era where we have the rise of
populism and democracies around the world
faltering under the pressures of mis and disinformation and the
like. For New Zealand, population data has been quite
instrumental, and particularly the census, in particular, in
terms of how it has underpinned quite significant and
quite complex decisions over a long period of time
that not only shape the decisions that we're making today, but will
have intergenerational consequences over the much longer term.
And these decisions require robustness, they require coverage, they
require credibility, and they can't just be viewed as short-term
efficiency,
because it is going to have some long-term consequences
if we don't make the right decisions now.
In terms of the opportunities that are ahead of us is
obviously administrative data, new analytical techniques,
and the possibilities that AI offer.
And given that the public sector is already looking at
decision-making using some of these tools-They present a wealth of
opportunities. However, they are not a simple
substitute for well-designed survey-based census data
that we have been using for these decision-makings to date.
Also equally important is that trust is
not going to be maintained without really good visibility for the
public, and for them to maintain confidence in how we're
using these emerging techniques, how we're using admin data,
and how we're going to evolve the IDI and the likes is also
equally important. So
we need really good oversight. We need mechanisms in which our
public is maintained in the journey as we transition to a
new state of what we think about and what we consider in
terms of census data and the like. I guess
my closing remark, and I'm really looking forward to taking
some questions if that's an option, is that this is
an moment for us to proceed with caution.
Yes, there are significant opportunities that innovation
presents, and there is a lot that New Zealand could do
in this space. However,
whatever decisions we make need to be able to strengthen our
long-term decision-making, not weaken it.
And if we want to make good long-term choices on issues that
fundamentally are going to have intergenerational
outcomes, is we need robust, trustworthy data with
good oversight and good governance.
Otherwise, we are at a point where we risk undermining the
very foundations of our democratic decision-making.
So I'll stop there and happy to take some questions.
Right. Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thanks. Thanks for your submission.
In your recommendations, you've raised a few things that are actually new that we
haven't heard. So I want to just ask some questions about those if that's okay.
Yeah, absolutely. Please do.
Well, one is this idea of a de facto population register,
where you talk about some of the countries that are using admin data.
Well, I'm not trying to be controversial, but you're obviously thinking about it
like every citizen having some kind of unique ID that then can help match
data.
Is that-
Exactly.
Yeah.
If you look at, I guess, where some of the other countries have gone with that-
Yeah
... is if you've got a good
individual level
mechanism-
I think that-
... of IDing our population, is then you can use that to build
that population level
information and database that we need to then be able to provide the
services that we need. But however, if you look at
where some of the other countries are, they're much more advanced in
terms of the quality and the robustness of those admin data
that they've got. So they've been in a position to do that, whereas we may
not be there yet, and we may need to go through a period of transition
in order to ensure that our admin data is of the
nature and the scale and the quality so that we are able to
substitute that if that is what the decision is.
Further, I would also say is the way we've collected our admin
data may not be the same way that others have done.
So there is a bit of
a journey to go through in terms of how we bring the public
up to speed in terms of what that admin data is and why we need it.
Yeah. I think you correctly identified too, if we're going to do that, it's
probably a large public conversation to build more trust because I think some
people would be uncomfortable, shall we say, about... Yeah.
Well, you'd need to
convince people about that that's useful.
The other quick two things, sorry, not to dominate.
But you've mentioned AI, I think that's kind of interesting, and transparency
around that. If you just want to make some more comments about how you think, yeah,
that should be governed. And then also, you seem to be saying that even the
current IDI, you think there should be some strengthening of the
oversight there around administrative data.
If you could just talk on those two things, that'd be great.
Okay. So I'll start with the IDI. I think if you look at the
evolution of the IDI, the IDI is a really powerful tool
that New Zealand has. And if you look at where
probably nearly about 10 years ago, it was a world-class
capability that New Zealand had. And I think over
time, that investment in it has
deteriorated, and it would be really valuable for us
to invest in it so that if it is going to
be the cornerstone on which so much of our public
decision-making is based on, particularly in the social sector, is
I think there is a lot that we could do to strengthen the
capabilities that are there. I think that ties into your
comment on AI, is there are, again, so many opportunities that
AI present, and at the backbone of the AI
infrastructure, we need good quality training data, and we
need good quality data that represents the population, and
particularly the underserved part of our population, which right now
we don't have confidence that the admin data we've got in
place is going to be an adequate substitute for that.
So we do need, in parallel, both an AI
infrastructure that supports it so that we can really
leverage the data that we've already got, the data we are going to
collect, and ensure we future-proof the decisions we're making in such
a way that we can truly leverage the capability
and the investments we're putting into these things.
Did you want to say something?
Yeah. My question was going to be about the AI as well, because I don't think that
has been discussed in detail.
Is that something that you are suggesting that we
Would potentially include as part of the committee's
recommendations on this bill that there needs to be
kind of mandatory transparency around when AI is being used?
Absolutely. I think if you look at the IDI in particular,
there are a lot of opportunities, and there's a lot of data in there that
is and could be used further and in more
advanced ways than we're currently using it.
However, I think the challenge we've got, which we've always
had, and so it's not just unique to New Zealand, is around
social license. And I think if we are
going to leverage the capabilities we've already invested in, and
public investments already gone into a lot of this, is
greater transparency means there's going to be more uptake,
hopefully more voluntary
sharing of information, and better acknowledgement and awareness
from the public for why this is really important.
At the moment,
if you look at the census responses or many other things, is
the lack of public engagement is it's, yes, it means we
haven't told the value proposition of why data is
so important and so instrumental to how governments make
good decisions.
But at the same time, is we haven't actually
clearly made it easy for public to engage and see
how their data is being used and how they can actually contribute to the
decisions that shape the country.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
No worries. Thank you so much for your time.
Relatively short submission, but very powerful, so thank you for that.
It was. Thank you very much. I appreciate your time this afternoon.
Yeah. They're not available?
Lance Smith and Zunza are being rescheduled for the afternoon.
Okay, so we're now going to call a hold.
We'll come back at 1:00,
so we'll back into it with a vengeance.
Thank you